[Illustration: Paul Renaud.

CONTEMPLATION]




  ASTRONOMY FOR
  AMATEURS


  BY
  CAMILLE FLAMMARION
  AUTHOR OF POPULAR ASTRONOMY


  _AUTHORIZED TRANSLATION BY_
  FRANCES A. WELBY


  _ILLUSTRATED_

  [Illustration]


  NEW YORK AND LONDON
  D. APPLETON AND COMPANY
  1910




COPYRIGHT, 1904, BY

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY


_Published October, 1904_




TO

MADAME C.R. CAVARÉ

  ORIGINAL MEMBER OF THE ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY OF FRANCE
  CHÂTEAU DE MAUPERTHUIS


MADAME: I have dedicated none of my works, save Stella--offered to the
liberal-minded, the free and generous friend of progress, and patron of
the sciences, James Gordon Bennett, editor of the New York Herald. In
this volume, Madame, I make another exception, and ask your permission
to offer it to the first woman who consented to be enrolled in the list
of members of the Astronomical Society of France, as foundress of this
splendid work, from the very beginning of our vast association (1887);
and who also desired to take part in the permanent organization of the
Observatory at Juvisy, a task of private enterprise, emancipated from
administrative routine. An Astronomy for Women[1] can not be better
placed than upon the table of a lady whose erudition is equal to her
virtues, and who has consecrated her long career to the pursuit and
service of the Beautiful, the Good, and the True.

                         CAMILLE FLAMMARION.

  OBSERVATORY OF JUVISY, _November, 1903_.




  CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                            PAGE

        INTRODUCTION                                    1

     I. THE CONTEMPLATION OF THE HEAVENS               10

    II. THE CONSTELLATIONS                             28

   III. THE STARS, SUNS OF THE INFINITE. A JOURNEY
            THROUGH SPACE                              56

    IV. OUR STAR THE SUN                               88

     V. THE PLANETS. A. MERCURY, VENUS, THE
            EARTH, MARS                               113

    VI. THE PLANETS. B. JUPITER, SATURN, URANUS,
            NEPTUNE                                   146

   VII. THE COMETS                                    172

  VIII. THE EARTH                                     205

    IX. THE MOON                                      232

     X. THE ECLIPSES                                  259

    XI. ON METHODS. HOW CELESTIAL DISTANCES
           ARE DETERMINED, AND HOW THE SUN IS
           WEIGHED                                    287

   XII. LIFE, UNIVERSAL AND ETERNAL                   317

        INDEX                                         341




   LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


   Contemplation                                 _Frontispiece_
                  From a painting by Paul Renaud

   FIG.                                                         PAGE

   1. The great Book of the Heavens is open to all eyes           15

   2. The earth in space. June solstice, midday                   20

   3. The Great Bear (or Dipper) and the Pole Star                34

   4. To find the Pole Star                                       35

   5. To find Cassiopeia                                          37

   6. To find Pegasus and Andromeda                               37

   7. Perseus, the Pleiades, Capella                              38

   8. To find Arcturus, the Herdsman, and the Northern Crown      40

   9. The Swan, Vega, the Eagle                                   41

  10. The Constellations of the Zodiac: summer and autumn;
        Capricorn, Archer, Scorpion, Balance, Virgin, Lion        46

  11. The Constellations of the Zodiac: winter and spring;
        Crab, Twins, Bull, Ram, Fishes, Water-Carrier             47

  12. Orion and his celestial companions                          48

  13. Winter Constellations                                       51

  14. Spring Constellations                                       52

  15. Summer Constellations                                       53

  16. Autumn Constellations                                       54

  17. The double star Mizar                                       69

  18. Triple star [xi] in Cancer                                  72

  19. Quadruple star [epsilon] of the Lyre                        73

  20. Sextuple star [theta] in the Nebula of Orion                74

  21. The Star-Cluster in Hercules                                79

  22. The Star-Cluster in the Centaur                             80

  23. The Nebula in Andromeda                                     81

  24. Nebula in the Greyhounds                                    82

  25. The Pleiades                                                83

  26. Occultation of the Pleiades by the Moon                     85

  27. Stellar dial of the double star [gamma] of the Virgin       86

  28. Comparative sizes of the Sun and Earth                      93

  29. Direct photograph of the Sun                                96

  30. Telescopic aspect of a Sun-Spot                             97

  31. Rose-colored solar flames 228000 kilometers (141,500
        miles) in height, _i.e._, 18 times the diameter of the
        Earth                                                    103

  32. Orbits of the four Planets nearest to the Sun              115

  33. Orbits of the four Planets farthest from the Sun           116

  34. Mercury near quadrature                                    117

  35. The Earth viewed from Mercury                              119

  36. The Evening Star                                           123

  37. Successive phases of Venus                                 124

  38. Venus at greatest brilliancy                               126

  39. The Earth viewed from Venus                                130

  40. Diminution of the polar snows of Mars during the
        summer                                                   136

  41. Telescopic aspect of the planet Mars (Feb., 1901)          137

  42. Telescopic aspect of the planet Mars (Feb., 1901)          138

  43. Chart of Mars                                              140

  44. The Earth viewed from Mars                                 144

  45. Telescopic aspect of Jupiter                               150

  46. Jupiter and his four principal satellites                  155

  47. Saturn                                                     159

  48. Varying perspective of Saturn's Rings, as seen from
        the Earth                                                161

  49. The Great Comet of 1858                                    174

  50. What our Ancestors saw in a Comet                          177

                         After Ambroise Paré (1858)

  51. Prodigies seen in the Heavens by our Forefathers           178

  52. The orbit of a Periodic Comet                              182

  53. The tails of Comets are opposed to the Sun                 185

  54. A Meteor                                                   191

  55. Shooting Stars of November 12, 1799                        196

                        From a contemporary drawing

  56. Fire-Ball seen from the Observatory at Juvisy, August
      10, 1899                                                   199

  57. Explosion of a Fire-Ball above Madrid, February 10,
      1896                                                       200

  58. Raphael's Fire-Ball (_The Madonna of Foligno_)             202

  59. A Uranolith                                                203

  60. Motion of the Earth round the Sun                          222

  61. Inclination of the Earth                                   224

  62. The divisions of the globe. Longitudes and latitudes       226

  63. To find the long and short months                          230

  64. The Full Moon slowly rises                                 234

  65. The Moon viewed with the unaided eye                       236

  66. The Man's head in the Moon                                 237

  67. Woman's head in the Moon                                   238

  68. The kiss in the Moon                                       239

  69. Photograph of the Moon                                     240

  70. The Moon's Phases                                          241

  71. Map of the Moon                                            247

  72. The Lunar Apennines                                        251

  73. Flammarion's Lunar Ring                                    253

  74. Lunar landscape with the Earth in the sky                  254

  75. Battle between the Medes and Lydians arrested by an
        Eclipse of the Sun                                       266

  76. Eclipse of the Moon at Laos (February 27, 1877)            269

  77. The path of the Eclipse of May 28, 1900                    273

  78. Total eclipse of the Sun, May 28, 1900, as observed
        from Elche (Spain)                                       281

  79. The Eclipse of May 28, 1900, as photographed by
        King Alfonso XIII, at Madrid                             285

  80. Measurement of Angles                                      289

  81. Division of the Circumference into 360 degrees             291

  82. Measurement of the distance of the Moon                    292

  83. Measurement of the distance of the Sun                     297

  84. Small apparent ellipses described by the stars as a
        result of the annual displacement of the Earth           306




INTRODUCTION


The Science of Astronomy is sublime and beautiful. Noble, elevating,
consoling, divine, it gives us wings, and bears us through Infinitude.
In these ethereal regions all is pure, luminous, and splendid. Dreams of
the Ideal, even of the Inaccessible, weave their subtle spells upon us.
The imagination soars aloft, and aspires to the sources of Eternal
Beauty.

What greater delight can be conceived, on a fine spring evening, at the
hour when the crescent moon is shining in the West amid the last glimmer
of twilight, than the contemplation of that grand and silent spectacle
of the stars stepping forth in sequence in the vast Heavens? All sounds
of life die out upon the earth, the last notes of the sleepy birds have
sunk away, the Angelus of the church hard by has rung the close of day.
But if life is arrested around us, we may seek it in the Heavens. These
incandescing orbs are so many points of interrogation suspended above
our heads in the inaccessible depths of space.... Gradually they
multiply. There is Venus, the white star of the shepherd. There Mars,
the little celestial world so near our own. There the giant Jupiter.
The seven stars of the Great Bear seem to point out the pole, while they
slowly revolve around it.... What is this nebulous light that blanches
the darkness of the heavens, and traverses the constellations like a
celestial path? It is the Galaxy, the Milky Way, composed of millions on
millions of suns!... The darkness is profound, the abyss immense....
See! Yonder a shooting star glides silently across the sky, and
disappears!...

Who can remain insensible to this magic spectacle of the starry Heavens?
Where is the mind that is not attracted to these enigmas? The
intelligence of the amateur, the feminine, no less than the more
material and prosaic masculine mind, is well adapted to the
consideration of astronomical problems. Women, indeed, are naturally
predisposed to these contemplative studies. And the part they are called
to play in the education of our children is so vast, and so important,
that the elements of Astronomy might well be taught by the young mother
herself to the budding minds that are curious about every issue--whose
first impressions are so keen and so enduring.

Throughout the ages women have occupied themselves successfully with
Astronomy, not merely in its contemplative and descriptive, but also in
its mathematical aspects. Of such, the most illustrious was the
beautiful and learned Hypatia of Alexandria, born in the year 375 of our
era, public lecturer on geometry, algebra, and astronomy, and author of
three works of great importance. Then, in that age of ignorance and
fanaticism, she fell a victim to human stupidity and malice, was dragged
from her chariot while crossing the Cathedral Square, in March, 415,
stripped of her garments, stoned to death, and burned as a dishonored
witch!

Among the women inspired with a passion for the Heavens may be cited St.
Catherine of Alexandria, admired for her learning, her beauty and her
virtue. She was martyred in the reign of Maximinus Daza, about the year
312, and has given her name to one of the lunar rings.

Another celebrated female mathematician was Madame Hortense Lepaute,
born in 1723, who collaborated with Clairaut in the immense calculations
by which he predicted the return of Halley's Comet. "Madame Lepaute,"
wrote Lalande, "gave us such immense assistance that, without her, we
should never have ventured to undertake this enormous labor, in which it
was necessary to calculate for every degree, and for a hundred and fifty
years, the distances and forces of the planets acting by their
attraction on the comet. During more than six months, we calculated from
morning to night, sometimes even at table, and as the result of this
forced labor I contracted an illness that has changed my constitution
for life; but it was important to publish the result before the arrival
of the comet."

This extract will suffice for the appreciation of the scientific ardor
of Madame Lepaute. We are indebted to her for some considerable works.
Her husband was clock-maker to the King. "To her intellectual talents,"
says one of her biographers, "were joined all the qualities of the
heart. She was charming to a degree, with an elegant figure, a dainty
foot, and such a beautiful hand that Voiriot, the King's painter, who
had made a portrait of her, asked permission to copy it, in order to
preserve a model of the best in Nature." And then we are told that
learned women can not be good-looking!...

The Marquise du Châtelet was no less renowned. She was predestined to
her career, if the following anecdote be credible. Gabrielle-Émilie de
Breteuil, born in 1706 (who, in 1725, was to marry the Marquis du
Châtelet, becoming, in 1733, the most celebrated friend of Voltaire),
was four or five years old when she was given an old compass, dressed up
as a doll, for a plaything. After examining this object for some time,
the child began angrily and impatiently to strip off the silly draperies
the toy was wrapped in, and after turning it over several times in her
little hands, she divined its uses, and traced a circle with it on a
sheet of paper. To her, among other things, we owe a precious, and
indeed the only French, translation of Newton's great work on universal
gravitation, the famous Principia, and she was, with Voltaire, an
eloquent propagator of the theory of attraction, rejected at that time
by the Académie des Sciences.

Numbers of other women astronomers might be cited, all showing how
accessible this highly abstract science is to the feminine intellect.
President des Brosses, in his charming Voyage en Italie, tells of the
visit he paid in Milan to the young Italian, Marie Agnesi, who delivered
harangues in Latin, and was acquainted with seven languages, and for
whom mathematics held no secrets. She was devoted to algebra and
geometry, which, she said, "are the only provinces of thought wherein
peace reigns." Madame de Charrière expressed herself in an aphorism of
the same order: "An hour or two of mathematics sets my mind at liberty,
and puts me in good spirits; I feel that I can eat and sleep better when
I have seen obvious and indisputable truths. This consoles me for the
obscurities of religion and metaphysics, or rather makes me forget them;
I am thankful there is something positive in this world." And did not
Madame de Blocqueville, last surviving daughter of Marshal Davout, who
died in 1892, exclaim in her turn: "Astronomy, science of sciences! by
which I am attracted, and terrified, and which I adore! By it my soul is
detached from the things of this world, for it draws me to those unknown
spheres that evoked from Newton the triumphant cry: '_Coeli enarrant
gloriam Dei!_'"

Nor must we omit Miss Caroline Herschel, sister of the greatest observer
of the Heavens, the grandest discoverer of the stars, that has ever
lived. Astronomy gave her a long career; she discovered no less than
seven comets herself, and her patient labors preserved her to the age of
ninety-eight.--And Mrs. Somerville, to whom we owe the English
translation of Laplace's Mécanique céleste, of whom Humboldt said, "In
pure mathematics, Mrs. Somerville is absolutely superior." Like Caroline
Herschel, she was almost a centenarian, appearing always much younger
than her years: she died at Naples, in 1872, at the age of
ninety-two.--So, too, the Russian Sophie Kovalevsky, descendant of
Mathias Corvinus, King of Hungary, who, an accomplished mathematician at
sixteen, married at eighteen, in order to follow the curriculum at the
University (then forbidden to unmarried women); arranging with her young
husband to live as brother and sister until their studies should be
completed. In 1888 the Prix Bordin of the Institut was conferred on
her.--And Maria Mitchell of the United States, for whom Le Verrier gave
a _fête_ at the Observatory of Paris, and who was exceptionally
authorized by Pope Pius IX to visit the Observatory of the Roman
College, at that time an ecclesiastical establishment, closed to
women.--And Madame Scarpellini, the Roman astronomer, renowned for her
works on shooting stars, whom the author had the honor of visiting, in
company with Father Secchi, Director of the Observatory mentioned above.

At the present time, Astronomy is proud to reckon among its most famous
workers Miss Agnes Clerke, the learned Irishwoman, to whom we owe,
_inter alia_, an excellent History of Astronomy in the Nineteenth
Century;--Mrs. Isaac Roberts, who, under the familiar name of Miss
Klumpke, sat on the Council of the Astronomical Society of France, and
is D. Sc. of the Faculty of Paris and head of the Bureau for measuring
star photographs at the Observatory of Paris (an American who became
English by her marriage with the astronomer Roberts, but is not
forgotten in France);--Mrs. Fleming, one of the astronomers of the
Observatory at Harvard College, U.S.A., to whom we owe the discovery of
a great number of variable stars by the examination of photographic
records, and by spectral photography;--Lady Huggins, who in England is
the learned collaborator of her illustrious husband;--and many others.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following chapters, which aim at summing up the essentials of
Astronomy in twelve lessons for amateurs, will not make astronomers or
mathematicians of my readers--much less prigs or pedants. They are
designed to show the constitution of the Universe, in its grandeur and
its beauty, so that, inhabiting this world, we may know where we are
living, may realize our position in the Cosmos, appreciate Creation as
it is, and enjoy it to better advantage. This sun by which we live, this
succession of months and years, of days and nights, the apparent motions
of the heavens, these starry skies, the divine rays of the moon, the
whole totality of things, constitutes in some sort the tissue of our
existence, and it is indeed extraordinary that the inhabitants of our
planet should almost all have lived till now without knowing where they
are, without suspecting the marvels of the Universe.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the rest, my little book is dedicated to a woman, muse and
goddess--the charming enchantress Urania, fit companion of Venus,
ranking even above her in the choir of celestial beauties, as purer and
more noble, dominating with her clear glance the immensities of the
universe. Urania, be it noted, is feminine, and never would the poetry
of the ancients have imagined a masculine symbol to personify the
pageant of the heavens. Not Uranus, nor Saturn, nor Jupiter can compare
with the ideal beauty of Urania.

Moreover, I have before me two delightful books, in breviary binding,
dated the one from the year 1686, the other from a century later, 1786.
The first was written by Fontenelle for a Marquise, and is entitled
Entretiens sur la Pluralité des Mondes. In this, banter is pleasantly
married with science, the author declaring that he only demands from his
fair readers the amount of application they would concede to a novel.
The second is written by Lalande, and is called Astronomie des Dames. In
addressing myself to both sexes, I am in honorable company with these
two sponsors and esteem myself the better for it.




CHAPTER I

THE CONTEMPLATION OF THE HEAVENS


The crimson disk of the Sun has plunged beneath the Ocean. The sea has
decked itself with the burning colors of the orb, reflected from the
Heavens in a mirror of turquoise and emerald. The rolling waves are gold
and silver, and break noisily on a shore already darkened by the
disappearance of the celestial luminary.

We gaze regretfully after the star of day, that poured its cheerful rays
anon so generously over many who were intoxicated with gaiety and
happiness. We dream, contemplating the magnificent spectacle, and in
dreaming forget the moments that are rapidly flying by. Yet the darkness
gradually increases, and twilight gives way to night.

The most indifferent spectator of the setting Sun as it descends beneath
the waves at the far horizon, could hardly be unmoved by the pageant of
Nature at such an impressive moment.

The light of the Crescent Moon, like some fairy boat suspended in the
sky, is bright enough to cast changing and dancing sparkles of silver
upon the ocean. The Evening Star declines slowly in its turn toward the
western horizon. Our gaze is held by a shining world that dominates the
whole of the occidental heavens. This is the "Shepherd's Star," Venus of
rays translucent.

Little by little, one by one, the more brilliant stars shine out. Here
are the white Vega of the Lyre, the burning Arcturus, the seven stars of
the Great Bear, a whole sidereal population catching fire, like
innumerable eyes that open on the Infinite. It is a new life that is
revealed to our imagination, inviting us to soar into these mysterious
regions.

O Night, diapered with fires innumerable! hast thou not written in
flaming letters on these Constellations the syllables of the great
enigma of Eternity? The contemplation of thee is a wonder and a charm.
How rapidly canst thou efface the regrets we suffered on the departure
of our beloved Sun! What wealth, what beauty hast thou not reserved for
our enraptured souls! Where is the man that can remain blind to such a
pageant and deaf to its language!

To whatever quarter of the Heavens we look, the splendors of the night
are revealed to our astonished gaze. These celestial eyes seem in their
turn to gaze at, and to question us. Thus indeed have they questioned
every thinking soul, so long as Humanity has existed on our Earth. Homer
saw and sung these self-same stars. They shone upon the slow succession
of civilizations that have disappeared, from Egypt of the period of the
Pyramids, Greece at the time of the Trojan War, Rome and Carthage,
Constantine and Charlemagne, down to the Twentieth Century. The
generations are buried with the dust of their ancient temples. The Stars
are still there, symbols of Eternity.

The silence of the vast and starry Heavens may terrify us; its immensity
may seem to overwhelm us. But our inquiring thought flies curiously on
the wings of dream, toward the remotest regions of the visible. It rests
on one star and another, like the butterfly on the flower. It seeks what
will best respond to its aspirations: and thus a kind of communication
is established, and, as it were, protected by all Nature in these silent
appeals. Our sense of solitude has disappeared. We feel that, if only as
infinitesimal atoms, we form part of that immense universe, and this
dumb language of the starry night is more eloquent than any speech. Each
star becomes a friend, a discreet confidant, often indeed a precious
counsellor, for all the thoughts it suggests to us are pure and holy.

Is any poem finer than the book written in letters of fire upon the
tablets of the firmament? Nothing could be more ideal. And yet, the
poetic sentiment that the beauty of Heaven awakens in our soul ought
not to veil its reality from us. That is no less marvelous than the
mystery by which we were enchanted.

And here we may ask ourselves how many there are, even among thinking
human beings, who ever raise their eyes to the starry heavens? How many
men and women are sincerely, and with unfeigned curiosity, interested in
these shining specks, and inaccessible luminaries, and really desirous
of a better acquaintance with them?

Seek, talk, ask in the intercourse of daily life. You, who read these
pages, who already love the Heavens, and comprehend them, who desire to
account for our existence in this world, who seek to know what the Earth
is, and what Heaven--you shall witness that the number of those
inquiring after truth is so limited that no one dares to speak of it, so
disgraceful is it to the so-called intelligence of our race. And yet!
the great Book of the Heavens is open to all eyes. What pleasures await
us in the study of the Universe! Nothing could speak more eloquently to
our heart and intellect!

Astronomy is the science _par excellence_. It is the most beautiful and
most ancient of all, inasmuch as it dates back to the indeterminate
times of highest antiquity. Its mission is not only to make us
acquainted with the innumerable orbs by which our nights are
illuminated, but it is, moreover, thanks to it that we know where and
what we are. Without it we should live as the blind, in eternal
ignorance of the very conditions of our terrestrial existence. Without
it we should still be penetrated with the naïve error that reduced the
entire Universe to our minute globule, making our Humanity the goal of
the Creation, and should have no exact notion of the immense reality.

To-day, thanks to the intellectual labor of so many centuries, thanks
also to the immortal genius of the men of science who have devoted their
lives to searching after Truth--men such as Copernicus, Galileo, Kepler,
Newton--the veil of ignorance has been rent, and glimpses of the marvels
of creation are perceptible in their splendid truth to the dazzled eye
of the thinker.

The study of Astronomy is not, as many suppose, the sacrifice of oneself
in a cerebral torture that obliterates all the beauty, the fascination,
and the grandeur of the pageant of Nature. Figures, and naught but
figures, would not be entertaining, even to those most desirous of
instruction. Let the reader take courage! We do not propose that he
shall decipher the hieroglyphics of algebra and geometry. Perish the
thought! For the rest, figures are but the scaffolding, the method, and
do not exist in Nature.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--The great Book of the Heavens is open to all
eyes.]

We simply beg of you to open your eyes, to see where you are, so that
you may not stray from the path of truth, which is also the path of
happiness. Once you have entered upon it, no persuasion will be needed
to make you persevere. And you will have the profound satisfaction of
knowing that you are thinking correctly, and that it is infinitely
better to be educated than to be ignorant. The reality is far beyond all
dreams, beyond the most fantastic imagination. The most fairy-like
transformations of our theaters, the most resplendent pageants of our
military reviews, the most sumptuous marvels on which the human race can
pride itself--all that we admire, all that we envy on the Earth--is as
nothing compared with the unheard-of wonders scattered through
Infinitude. There are so many that one does not know how to see them.
The fascinated eye would fain grasp all at once.

If you will yield yourselves to the pleasure of gazing upon the
sparkling fires of Space, you will never regret the moments passed all
too rapidly in the contemplation of the Heavens.

Diamonds, turquoises, rubies, emeralds, all the precious stones with
which women love to deck themselves, are to be found in greater
perfection, more beautiful, and more splendid, set in the immensity of
Heaven! In the telescopic field, we may watch the progress of armies of
majestic and powerful suns, from whose attacks there is naught to fear.
And these vagabond comets and shooting stars and stellar nebulæ, do they
not make up a prodigious panorama? What are our romances in comparison
with the History of Nature? Soaring toward the Infinite, we purify our
souls from all the baseness of this world, we strive to become better
and more intelligent.

       *       *       *       *       *

But in the first place, you ask, what are the Heavens? This vault
oppresses us. We can not venture to investigate it.

Heaven, we reply, is no vault, it is a limitless immensity,
inconceivable, unfathomable, that surrounds us on all sides, and in the
midst of which our globe is floating. THE HEAVENS ARE ALL THAT EXISTS,
all that we see, and all that we do not see: the Earth on which we are,
that bears us onward in her rapid flight; the Moon that accompanies us,
and sheds her soft beams upon our silent nights; the good Sun to which
we owe our existence; the Stars, suns of Infinitude; in a word--the
whole of Creation.

Yes, our Earth is an orb of the Heavens: the sky is her domain, and our
Sun, shining above our heads, and fertilizing our seasons, is as much a
star as the pretty sparkling points that scintillate up there, in the
far distance, and embellish the calm of our nights with their
brilliancy. All are in the Heavens, you as well as I, for the Earth, in
her course through Space, bears us with herself into the depths of
Infinitude.

In the Heavens there is neither "above" nor "below." These words do not
exist in celestial speech, because their significance is relative to the
surface of this planet only. In reality, for the inhabitants of the
Earth, "low" is the inside, the center of the globe, and "high" is what
is above our heads, all round the Earth. The Heavens are what surround
us on all sides, to Infinity.

The Earth is, like her fellows, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn,
Uranus, Neptune, one of the planets of the great solar family.

The Sun, her father, protects her, and directs all her actions. She, as
the grateful daughter, obeys him blindly. All float in perfect harmony
over the celestial ocean.

But, you may say, on what does the Earth rest in her ethereal
navigation?

On nothing. The Earth turns round the colossal Sun, a little globe of
relatively light weight, isolated on all sides in Space, like a
soap-bubble blown by some careless child.

Above, below, on all sides, millions of similar globes are grouped into
families, and form other systems of worlds revolving round the numerous
and distant stars that people Infinitude; suns more or less analogous to
that by which we are illuminated, and generally speaking of larger bulk,
although our Sun is a million times larger than our planet.

Among the ancients, before the isolation of our globe in Space and the
motions that incessantly alter its position were recognized, the Earth
was supposed to be the immobile lower half of the Universe. The sky was
regarded as the upper half. The ancients supplied our world with
fantastic supports that penetrated to the Infernal Regions. They could
not admit the notion of the Earth's isolation, because they had a false
idea of its weight. To-day, however, we know positively that the Earth
is based on nothing. The innumerable journeys accomplished round it in
all directions give definite proof of this. It is attached to nothing.
As we said before, there is neither "above" nor "below" in the Universe.
What we call "below" is the center of the Earth. For the rest the Earth
turns upon its own axis in twenty-four hours. Night is only a partial
phenomenon, due to the rotary motion of the planet, a motion that could
not exist under conditions other than that of the absolute isolation of
our globe in space.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--The earth in space. June solstice, midday.]

Since the Sun can only illuminate one side of our globe at one moment,
that is to say one hemisphere, it follows that Night is nothing but the
state of the part that is not illuminated. As the Earth revolves upon
itself, all the parts successively exposed to the Sun are in the day,
while the parts situated opposite to the Sun, in the cone of shadow
produced by the Earth itself, are in night. But whether it be noon or
midnight, the stars always occupy the same position in the Heavens,
even when, dazzled by the ardent light of the orb of day, we can no
longer see them; and when we are plunged into the darkness of the night,
the god Phoebus still continues to pour his beneficent rays upon the
countries turned toward him.

The sequence of day and night is a phenomenon belonging, properly
speaking, to the Earth, in which the rest of the Universe does not
participate. The same occurs for every world that is illuminated by a
sun, and endowed with a rotary movement. In absolute space, there is no
succession of nights and days.

Upheld in space by forces that will be explained at a later point, our
planet glides in the open heavens round our Sun.

Imagine a magnificent aerostat, lightly and rapidly cleaving space.
Surround it with eight little balloons of different sizes, the smallest
like those sold on the streets for children to play with, the larger,
such as are distributed for a bonus in large stores. Imagine this group
sailing through the air, and you have the system of our worlds in
miniature.

Still, this is only an image, a comparison. The balloons are held up by
the atmosphere, in which they float at equilibrium. The Earth is
sustained by nothing material. What maintains her in equilibrium is the
ethereal void; an immaterial force; gravitation. The Sun attracts her,
and if she did not revolve, she would drop into him; but rotating round
him, at a speed of 107000 kilometers[2] (about 66000 miles) per hour,
she produces a centrifugal force, like that of a stone in a sling, that
is precisely equivalent, and of contrary sign, to its gravitation toward
the central orb, and these two equilibrated forces keep her at the same
medium distance.

This solar and planetary group does not exist solitary in the immense
void that extends indefinitely around us. As we said above, each star
that we admire in the depths of the sky, and to which we lift up our
eyes and thoughts during the charmed hours of the night, is another sun
burning with its own light, the chief of a more or less numerous family,
such as are multiplied through all space to infinity. Notwithstanding
the immense distances between the sun-stars, Space is so vast, and the
number of these so great, that by an effect of perspective due solely to
the distance, appearances would lead us to believe that the stars were
touching. And under certain telescopic aspects, and in some of the
astral photographs, they really do appear to be contiguous.

The Universe is infinite. Space is limitless. If our love for the
Heavens should incite in us the impulse, and provide us with the means
of undertaking a journey directed to the ends of Heaven as its goal, we
should be astonished, on arriving at the confines of the Milky Way, to
see the grandiose and phenomenal spectacle of a new Universe unfold
before our dazzled eyes; and if in our mad career we crossed this new
archipelago of worlds to seek the barriers of Heaven beyond them, we
should still find universe eternally succeeding to universe before us.
Millions of suns roll on in the immensities of Space. Everywhere, on all
sides, Creation renews itself in an infinite variety.

According to all the probabilities, universal life is distributed there
as well as here, and has sown the germ of intelligence upon those
distant worlds that we divine in the vicinity of the innumerable suns
that plow the ether, for everything upon the Earth tends to show that
Life is the goal of Nature. Burning foci, inextinguishable sources of
warmth and light, these various, multi-colored suns shed their rays upon
the worlds that belong to them and which they fertilize.

Our globe is no exception in the Universe. As we have seen, it is one of
the celestial orbs, nourished, warmed, lighted, quickened by the Sun,
which in its turn again is but a star.

Innumerable Worlds! We dream of them. Who can say that their unknown
inhabitants do not think of us in their turn, and that Space may not be
traversed by waves of thought, as it is by the vibrations of light and
universal gravitation? May not an immense solidarity, hardly guessed at
by our imperfect senses, exist between the Celestial Humanities, our
Earth being only a modest planet.

Let us meditate on this Infinity! Let us lose no opportunity of
employing the best of our hours, those of the silence and peace of the
bewitching nights, in contemplating, admiring, spelling out the words of
the Great Book of the Heavens. Let our freed souls fly swift and rapt
toward those marvelous countries where indescribable joys are prepared
for us, and let us do homage to the first and most splendid of the
sciences, to Astronomy, which diffuses the light of Truth within us.

To poetical souls, the contemplation of the Heavens carries thought away
to higher regions than it attains in any other meditation. Who does not
remember the beautiful lines of Victor Hugo in the Orientales? Who has
not heard or read them? The poem is called "Ecstasy," and it is a
fitting title. The words are sometimes set to music, and the melody
seems to complete their pure beauty:

          J'étais seul près des flots par une nuit d'étoiles.
          Pas un nuage aux cieux, sur les mers pas de voiles;
          Mes yeux plongeaient plus loin que le monde réel,
          Et les bois et les monts et toute la nature
          Semblaient interroger, dans un confus murmure,
              Les flots des mers, les feux du ciel.

          Et les étoiles d'or, légions infinies,
          A voix haute, à voix basse, avec mille harmonies
          Disaient, en inclinant leurs couronnes de feu;
          Et les flots bleus, que rien ne gouverne et n'arrête,
          Disaient en recourbant l'écume de leur crête:
              ... C'est le Seigneur, le Seigneur Dieu!

_Note: Free Translation_

          I was alone on the waves, on a starry night,
          Not a cloud in the sky, not a sail in sight,
          My eyes pierced beyond the natural world...
          And the woods, and the hills, and the voice of Nature
          Seemed to question in a confused murmur,
              The waves of the Sea, and Heaven's fires.

          And the golden stars in infinite legion,
          Sang loudly, and softly, in glad recognition,
          Inclining their crowns of fire;...
          And the waves that naught can check nor arrest
          Sang, bowing the foam of their haughty crest...
              Behold the Lord God--Jehovah!

The immortal poet of France was an astronomer. The author more than
once had the honor of conversing with him on the problems of the starry
sky--and reflected that astronomers might well be poets.

It is indeed difficult to resist a sense of profound emotion before the
abysses of infinite Space, when we behold the innumerable multitude of
worlds suspended above our heads. We feel in this solitary contemplation
of the Heavens that there is more in the Universe than tangible and
visible matter: that there are forces, laws, destinies. Our ants' brains
may know themselves microscopic, and yet recognize that there is
something greater than the Earth, the Heavens;--more absolute than the
Visible, the Invisible;--beyond the more or less vulgar affairs of life,
the sense of the True, the Good, the Beautiful. We feel that an immense
mystery broods over Nature,--over Being, over created things. And it is
here again that Astronomy surpasses all the other sciences, that it
becomes our sovereign teacher, that it is the _pharos_ of modern
philosophy.

O Night, mysterious, sublime, and infinite! withdrawing from our eyes
the veil spread above us by the light of day, giving back transparency
to the Heavens, showing us the prodigious reality, the shining casket of
the celestial diamonds, the innumerable stars that succeed each other
interminably in immeasurable space! Without Night we should know
nothing. Without it our eyes would never have divined the sidereal
population, our intellects would never have pierced the harmony of the
Heavens, and we should have remained the blind, deaf parasites of a
world isolated from the rest of the universe. O Sacred Night! If on the
one hand it rests upon the heights of Truth beyond the day's illusions,
on the other its invisible urns pour down a silent and tranquil peace, a
penetrating calm, upon our souls that weary of Life's fever. It makes us
forget the struggles, perfidies, intrigues, the miseries of the hours of
toil and noisy activity, all the conventionalities of civilization. Its
domain is that of rest and dreams. We love it for its peace and calm
tranquillity. We love it because it is true. We love it because it
places us in communication with the other worlds, because it gives us
the presage of Life, Universal and Eternal, because it brings us Hope,
because it proclaims us citizens of Heaven.




CHAPTER II

THE CONSTELLATIONS


In Chapter I we saw the Earth hanging in space, like a globe isolated on
all sides, and surrounded at vast distances by a multitude of stars.

These fiery orbs are suns like that which illuminates ourselves. They
shine by their own light. We know this for a fact, because they are so
far off that they could neither be illuminated by the Sun, nor, still
more, reflect his rays back upon us: and because, on the other hand, we
have been able to measure and analyze their light. Many of these distant
suns are simple and isolated; others are double, triple, or multiple;
others appear to be the centers of systems analogous to that which
gravitates round our own Sun, and of which we form part. But these
celestial tribes are situated at such remote distances from us that it
is impossible to distinguish all the individuals of each particular
family. The most delicate observations have only revealed a few of them.
We must content ourselves here with admiring the principals,--the
sun-stars,--prodigious globes, flaming torches, scattered profusely
through the firmament.

How, then, is one to distinguish them? How can they be readily found and
named? There are so many of them!

Do not fear; it is quite a simple matter. In studying the surface of the
Earth we make use of geographical maps on which the continents and seas
of which it consists are drawn with the utmost care. Each country of our
planet is subdivided into states, each of which has its proper name. We
shall pursue the same plan in regard to the Heavens, and it will be all
the easier since the Great Book of the Firmament is constantly open to
our gaze. Our globe, moreover, actually revolves upon itself so that we
read the whole in due sequence. Given a clear atmosphere, and a little
stimulus to the will from our love of truth and science, and the
geography of the Heavens, or "uranography," will soon be as familiar to
us as the geography of our terrestrial atom.

On a beautiful summer's night, when we look toward the starry sky, we
are at first aware only of a number of shining specks. The stars seem to
be scattered almost accidentally through Space; they are so numerous and
so close to one another that it would appear rash to attempt to name
them separately. Yet some of the brighter ones particularly attract and
excite our attention. After a little observation we notice a certain
regularity in the arrangement of these distant suns, and take pleasure
in drawing imaginary figures round the celestial groups.

That is what the ancients did from a practical point of view. In order
to guide themselves across the trackless ocean, the earliest Phenician
navigators noted certain fixed bearings in the sky, by which they mapped
out their routes. In this way they discovered the position of the
immovable Pole, and acquired empire over the sea. The Chaldean pastors,
too, the nomad people of the East, invoked the Heavens to assist in
their migrations. They grouped the more brilliant of the stars into
Constellations with simple outlines, and gave to each of these celestial
provinces a name derived from mythology, history, or from the natural
kingdoms. It is impossible to determine the exact epoch of this
primitive celestial geography. The Centaur Chiron, Jason's tutor, was
reputed the first to divide the Heavens upon the sphere of the
Argonauts. But this origin is a little mythical! In the Bible we have
the Prophet Job, who names Orion, the Pleiades, and the Hyades, 3,300
years ago. The Babylonian Tables, and the hieroglyphs of Egypt, witness
to an astronomy that had made considerable advance even in those remote
epochs. Our actual constellations, which are doubtless of Babylonian
origin, appear to have been arranged in their present form by the
learned philosopher Eudoxus of Cnidus, about the year 360 B.C. Aratus
sang of them in a didactic poem toward 270. Hipparchus of Rhodes was the
first to note the astronomical positions with any precision, one hundred
and thirty years before our era. He classified the stars in order of
magnitude, according to their apparent brightness; and his catalogue,
preserved in the Almagest of Ptolemy, contains 1,122 stars distributed
into forty-eight Constellations.

The figures of the constellations, taken almost entirely from fable, are
visible only to the eyes of the imagination, and where the ancients
placed such and such a person or animal, we may see, with a little
good-will, anything we choose to fancy. There is nothing real about
these figures. And yet it is indispensable to be able to recognize the
constellations in order to find our way among the innumerable army of
the stars, and we shall commence this study with the description of the
most popular and best known of them all, the one that circles every
night through our Northern Heavens. Needless to name it; it is familiar
to every one. You have already exclaimed--the Great Bear!

This vast and splendid association of suns, which is also known as the
Chariot of David, the Plow or Charles's Wain, and the Dipper, is one of
the finest constellations in the Heavens, and one of the oldest--seeing
that the Chinese hailed it as the divinity of the North, over three
thousand years ago.

If any of my readers should happen to forget its position in the sky,
the following is a very simple expedient for finding it. Turn to the
North--that is, opposite to the point where the sun is to be found at
midday. Whatever the season of the year, day of the month, or hour of
the night, you will always see, high up in the firmament, seven
magnificent stars, arranged in a quadrilateral, followed by a tail, or
handle, of three stars. This magnificent constellation never sinks below
our horizon. Night and day it watches above us, turning in twenty-four
hours round a very famous star that we shall shortly become acquainted
with. In the figure of the Great Bear, the four stars of the
quadrilateral are found in the body, and the three at the extremity make
the tail. As David's Chariot, the four stars represent the wheels, and
the three others the horses.

Sometimes our ancestors called them the Seven Oxen, the "oxen of the
celestial pastures," from which the word septentrion (_septem triones_,
seven oxen of labor) is derived. Some see a Plowshare; others more
familiarly call this figure the Dipper. As it rotates round the pole,
its outline varies with the different positions.

It is not easy to guess why this constellation should have been called
the Bear. Yet the name has had a certain influence. From the Greek word
_arctos_ (bear) has come arctic, and for its antithesis, antarctic. From
the Latin word _trio_ (ox of labor) has come septentrion, the seven
oxen. Etymology is not always logical. Is not the word "venerate"
derived from Venus?

In order to distinguish one star from another, the convention of
denoting them by the letters of the Greek Alphabet has been adopted, for
it would be impossible to give a name to each, so considerable is their
number.[3]

[alpha] and [beta] denote the front wheels of the Chariot generally
known as the "pointers;" [gamma] and [delta] the hind wheels; [epsilon],
[zeta], [eta] the three horses. All these stars are of the second order
of magnitude (the specific meaning of this expression will be explained
in the next chapter), except the last ([delta]) of the quadrilateral,
which is of the third order.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--The Great Bear (or Dipper), and the Pole-Star.]

Figure 3 gives the outline of this primitive constellation. In revolving
in twenty-four hours round the Pole, which is situated at the
prolongation of a line drawn from [beta] to [alpha], it occupies every
conceivable position,--as if this page were turned in all directions.
But the relative arrangement of the seven stars remains unaltered. In
contemplating these seven stars it must never be forgotten that each is
a dazzling sun, a center of force and life. One of them is especially
remarkable: [zeta], known as Mizar to the Arabs. Those who have good
sight will distinguish near it a minute star, Alcor, or the Cavalier,
also called Saidak by the Arabs--that is, the Test, because it can be
used as a test of vision. But further, if you have a small telescope at
your disposal, direct it upon the fine star Mizar: you will be
astonished at discovering two of the finest diamonds you could wish to
see, with which no brilliant is comparable. There are several double
stars; these we shall become acquainted with later on.

Meantime, we must not forget our celestial geography. The Great Bear
will help us to find all the adjacent constellations.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--To find the Pole-Star.]

If a straight line is drawn (Fig. 4) from [beta] through [alpha], which
forms the extremity of the square, and is prolonged by a quantity equal
to the distance of [alpha] from the tip of the handle, we come on a star
of second magnitude, which marks the extremity of a figure perfectly
comparable with the Great Bear, but smaller, less brilliant, and
pointing in the contrary direction. This is the Little Bear, composed,
like its big brother, of seven stars; the one situated at the end of the
line by which we have found it is the Pole-Star.

Immovable in the region of the North Pole, the Pole-Star has captivated
all eyes by its position in the firmament. It is the providence of
mariners who have gone astray on the ocean, for it points them to the
North, while it is the pivot of the immense rotation accomplished round
it by all the stars in twenty-four hours. Hence it is a very important
factor, and we must hasten to find it, and render it due homage. It
should be added that its special immobility, in the prolongation of the
Earth's axis, is merely an effect caused by the diurnal movements of our
planet. Our readers are of course aware that it is the earth that turns
and not the sky. But evidence of this will be given later on. In looking
at the Pole-Star, the South is behind one, the East to the right, and
the West to the left.

Between the Great and the Little Bear, we can distinguish a winding
procession of smaller stars. These constitute the Dragon.

We will continue our journey by way of Cassiopeia, a fine constellation
placed on the opposite side of the Pole-Star in relation to the Great
Bear, and shaped somewhat like the open limbs of the letter W. It is
also called the Chair. And, in fact, when the figure is represented with
the line [alpha] [beta] below, the line [chi] [gamma] forms the seat,
and [gamma] [delta] [epsilon] its back.

If a straight line is drawn from [delta] of the Great Bear, and
prolonged beyond the Pole-Star in a quantity equal to the distance which
separates these two stars, it is easy to find this constellation (Fig.
5). This group, like the preceding, never sets, and is always visible,
opposite to the Great Bear. It revolves in twenty-four hours round the
Pole-Star, and is to be seen, now above, now below, now to the right,
now to the left.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--To find Cassiopeia.]

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--To Find Pegasus and Andromeda.]

If in the next place, starting from the stars [alpha] and [delta] in the
Great Bear, we draw two lines which join at Polaris and are prolonged
beyond Cassiopeia, we arrive at the Square of Pegasus (Fig. 6), a vast
constellation that terminates on one side in a prolongation formed of
three stars.

These three last stars belong to Andromeda, and themselves abut on
Perseus. The last star in the Square of Pegasus is also the first in
Andromeda.

[gamma] of Andromeda is a magnificent double orb, to which we shall
return in the next chapter, _i.e._, the telescope resolves it into two
marvelous suns, one of which is topaz-yellow, and the other
emerald-green. Three stars, indeed, are visible with more powerful
instruments.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--Perseus, the Pleiades, Capella.]

Above [beta] and near a small star, is visible a faint, whitish,
luminous trail: this is the oblong nebula of Andromeda, the first
mentioned in the history of astronomy, and one of the most beautiful in
the Heavens, perceptible to the unaided eye on very clear nights.

The stars [alpha], [beta] and [gamma] of Perseus form a concave bow
which will serve in a new orientation. If it is prolonged in the
direction of [delta], we find a very brilliant star of the first
magnitude. This is Capella, the Goat, in the constellation of the
Charioteer (Fig. 7).

If coming back to [delta] in Perseus, a line is drawn toward the South,
we reach the Pleiades, a gorgeous cluster of stars, scintillating like
the finest dust of diamonds, on the shoulder of the Bull, to which we
shall come shortly, in studying the Constellations of the Zodiac.

Not far off is a very curious star, [beta] of Perseus, or Algol, which
forms a little triangle with two others smaller than itself. This star
is peculiar in that, instead of shining with a fixed light, it varies in
intensity, and is sometimes pale, sometimes brilliant. It belongs to the
category of variable stars which we shall study later on. All the
observations made on it for more than two hundred years go to prove that
a dark star revolves round this sun, almost in the plane of our line of
sight, producing as it passes in front of it a partial eclipse that
reduces it from the second to the fourth magnitude, every other two
days, twenty hours, and forty-nine minutes.

And now, let us return to the Great Bear, which aided us so beneficently
to start for these distant shores, and whence we shall set out afresh in
search of other constellations.

If we produce the curved line of the tail, or handle, we encounter a
magnificent golden-yellow star, a splendid sun of dazzling brilliancy:
let us make our bow to Arcturus, [alpha] of the Herdsman, which is at
the extremity of this pentagonal constellation. The principal stars of
this asterism are of the third magnitude, with the exception of [alpha],
which is of the first. Alongside of the Herdsman is a circle consisting
of five stars of the third and fourth magnitude, save the third,
[alpha], or the Pearl, which is of the second magnitude. This is the
Corona Borealis. It is very easily recognized (Fig. 8).

[Illustration: FIG. 8.--To find Arcturus, the Herdsman, and the Northern
Crown.]

A line drawn from the Pole-Star to Arcturus forms the base of an
equilateral triangle, the apex of which, situated opposite the Great
Bear, is occupied by Vega, or [alpha] of the Lyre, a splendid diamond of
ideal purity scintillating through the ether. This magnificent star, of
first magnitude, is, with Arcturus, the most luminous in our Heavens. It
burns with a white light, in the proximity of the Milky Way, not far
from a constellation that is very easily recognized by the arrangement
of its principal stars in the form of a cross. It is named Cygnus, the
Bird, or the Swan (Fig. 9), and is easy to find by the Square of
Pegasus, and the Milky Way. This figure, the brilliancy of whose
constituents (of the third and fourth magnitudes) contrasts strongly
with the pallor of the Milky Way, includes at its extremity at the foot
of the Cross, a superb double star, [beta] or Albirio: [alpha] of Cygnus
is also called Deneb. The first star of which the distance was
calculated is in this constellation. This little orb of fifth magnitude,
which hangs 69000000000000 kilometers (42000000000000 miles)
above our Earth, is the nearest of all the stars to the skies of Europe.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.--The Swan, Vega, the Eagle.]

Not far off is the fine Eagle, which spreads its wings in the Milky Way,
and in which the star Altaïr, [alpha], of first magnitude, is situated
between its two satellites, [beta] and [gamma].

The Constellation of Hercules, toward which the motions of the Sun are
impelling us, with all the planets of its system, is near the Lyre. Its
principal stars can be recognized inside the triangle formed by the
Pole-Star, Arcturus, and Vega.

All the Constellations described above belong to the Northern
Hemisphere. Those nearest the pole are called circumpolar. They revolve
round the pole in twenty-four hours.

Having now learned the Northern Heavens, we must come back to the Sun,
which we have left behind us. The Earth revolves round him in a year,
and in consequence he seems to revolve round us, sweeping through a vast
circle of the celestial sphere. In each year, at the same period, he
passes the same points of the Heavens, in front of the same
constellations, which are rendered invisible by his light. We know that
the stars are at a fixed position from the Earth, whatever their
distance, and that if we do not see them at noon as at midnight, it is
simply because they are extinguished by the dazzling light of the orb of
day. With the aid of a telescope it is always possible to see the more
brilliant of them.

The Zodiac is the zone of stars traversed by the Sun in the course of a
year. This word is derived from the Greek _Zodiakos_, which signifies
"animal," and this etymology arose because most of the figures traced
on this belt of stars represent animals. The belt is divided into twelve
parts that are called the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, also named by the
ancients the "Houses of the Sun," since the Sun visits one of them in
each month. These are the signs, with the primitive characters that
distinguish them: the Ram [Aries], the Bull [Taurus], the Twins
[Gemini], the Crab [Cancer], the Lion [Leo], the Virgin [Virgo], the
Balance [Libra], the Scorpion [Scorpio], the Archer [Sagittarius], the
Goat [Capricorn], the Water-Carrier [Aquarius], the Fishes [Pisces]. The
sign [Aries] represents the horns of the Ram, [Taurus] the head of the
Bull, and so on.

If you will now follow me into the Houses of the Sun you will readily
recognize them again, provided you have a clear picture of the principal
stars of the Northern Heavens. First, you see the Ram, the initial sign
of the Zodiac; because at the epoch at which the actual Zodiac was
fixed, the Sun entered this sign at the vernal equinox, and the equator
crossed the ecliptic at this point. This constellation, in which the
horns of the Ram (third magnitude) are the brightest, is situated
between Andromeda and the Pleiades. Two thousand years ago, the Ram was
regarded as the symbol of spring; but owing to the secular movement of
the precession of the equinoxes, the Sun is no longer there on March 21:
he is in the Fishes.

To the left, or east of the Ram, we find the Bull, the head of which
forms a triangle in which burns Aldebaran, of first magnitude, a
magnificent red star that marks the right eye; and the Hyades,
scintillating pale and trembling, on its forehead. The timid Pleiades,
as we have seen, veil themselves on the shoulder of the Bull--a
captivating cluster, of which six stars can be counted with the unaided
eye, while several hundred are discovered with the telescope.

Next the Twins. They are easily recognized by the two fine stars,
[alpha] and [beta], of first magnitude, which mark their heads, and
immortalize Castor and Pollux, the sons of Jupiter, celebrated for their
indissoluble friendship.

Cancer, the Crab, is the least important sign of the Zodiac. It is
distinguished only by five stars of fourth and fifth magnitudes,
situated below the line of Castor and Pollux, and by a pale cluster
called Præsepe, the Beehive.

The Lion next approaches, superb in his majesty. At his heart is a
gorgeous star of first magnitude, [alpha] or Regulus. This figure forms
a grand trapezium of four stars on the celestial sphere.

The Virgin exhibits a splendid star of first magnitude; this is Spica,
which with Regulus and Arcturus, form a triangle by which this
constellation can be recognized.

The Balance follows the Virgin. Its scales, marked by two stars of
second magnitude, are situated a little to the East of Spica.

We next come to the eighth constellation of the Zodiac, which is one of
the most beautiful of this belt of stars. Antares, a red star of first
magnitude, occupies the heart of the venomous and accursed Scorpion. It
is situated on the prolongation of a line joining Regulus to Spica, and
forms with Vega of the Lyre, and Arcturus of the Herdsman, a great
isosceles triangle, of which this latter star is the apex.

The Scorpion, held to be a sign of ill luck, has been prejudicial to the
Archer, which follows it, and traces an oblique trapezium in the sky, a
little to the east of Antares. These two southernmost constellations
never rise much above the horizon for France and England. In fable, the
Archer is Chiron, the preceptor of Jason, Achilles and Æsculapius.

Capricorn lies to the south of Altaïr, on the prolongation of a line
from the Lyre to the Eagle. It is hardly noticeable save for the stars
[alpha] and [beta] of third magnitude, which scintillate on its
forehead.

The Water-Carrier pours his streams toward the horizon. He is not rich
in stars, exhibiting only three of third magnitude that form a very
flattened triangle.

Lastly the Fishes, concluding sign of the Zodiac, are found to the
south of Andromeda and Pegasus. Save for [alpha], of third magnitude,
this constellation consists of small stars that are hardly visible.

These twelve zodiacal constellations will be recognized on examining the
chart (Figs. 10-11).

We must now visit the stars of the Southern Heavens, some of which are
equally deserving of admiration.

[Illustration: FIG. 10.--The Constellations of the Zodiac: summer and
autumn; Capricorn, Archer, Scorpion, Balance, Virgin, Lion.]

It should in the first place be noted that the signs of the Zodiac and
the Southern Constellations are not, like those which are circumpolar,
perpetually visible at all periods of the year. Their visibility depends
on the time of year and the hour of the night.[4]

In order to admire the fine constellations of the North, as described
above, we have only to open our windows on a clear summer's evening, or
walk round the garden in the mysterious light of these inaccessible
suns, while we look up at the immense fields in which each star is like
the head of a celestial spear.

But the summer is over, autumn is upon us, and then, too soon, comes
winter clothed in hoar-frost. The days are short and cold, dark and
dreary; but as a compensation the night is much longer, and adorns
herself with her most beautiful jewels, offering us the contemplation of
her inexhaustible treasures.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.--The Constellations of the Zodiac: winter and
spring; Crab, Twins, Bull, Ram, Fishes, Water-Carrier.]

First, let us do homage to the magnificent Orion, most splendid of all
the constellations: he advances like a colossal giant, and confronts the
Bull.

This constellation appears about midnight in November, in the
south-eastern Heavens; toward eleven o'clock in December and January,
due south; about ten in February, in the south-east; about nine in
March, and about eight in April, in the west; and then sets below our
horizon.

[Illustration: FIG. 12.--Orion and his celestial companions.]

It is indisputably the most striking figure in the sky, and with the
Great Bear, the most ancient in history, the first that was noticed:
both are referred to in the ancient texts of China, Chaldea, and Egypt.

Eight principal stars delineate its outline; two are of the first
magnitude, five of the second, and one of the third (Fig. 12). The most
brilliant are Betelgeuse ([alpha]) and Rigel ([beta]): the former
marking the right shoulder of the Colossus as it faces us; the second
the left foot. The star on the left shoulder is [gamma] or Bellatrix, of
second magnitude; that of the right foot, [chi], is almost of the third.
Three stars of second magnitude placed obliquely at equal distances from
each other, the first or highest of which marks the position of the
equatorial line, indicate the Belt or Girdle. These stars, known as the
Three Kings, and by country people as the Rake, assist greatly in the
recognition of this fine constellation.

A little below the second star of the Belt, a large white patch, like a
band of fog, the apparent dimensions of which are equal to that of the
lunar disk, is visible to the unaided eye: this is the Nebula of Orion,
one of the most magnificent in the entire Heavens. It was discovered in
1656 by Huyghens, who counted twelve stars in the pale cloud. Since that
date it has been constantly studied and photographed by its many
admirers, while the giant eye of the telescope discovers in it to-day an
innumerable multitude of little stars which reveal the existence of an
entire universe in this region.

Orion is not merely the most imposing of the celestial figures; it is
also the richest in sidereal wonders. Among these, it exhibits the most
complex of all the multiple systems known to us: that of the star
[theta] situated in the celebrated nebula just mentioned. This marvelous
star, viewed through a powerful telescope, breaks up into six suns,
forming a most remarkable stellar group.

This region is altogether one of the most brilliant in the entire
firmament. We must no longer postpone our homage to the brightest star
in the sky, the magnificent Sirius, which shines on the left below
Orion: it returns every year toward the end of November. This marvelous
star, of dazzling brilliancy, is the first, [alpha], in the
constellation of the Great Dog, which forms a quadrilateral, the base of
which is adjacent to a triangle erected from the horizon.

When astronomers first endeavored to determine the distance of the
stars, Sirius, which attracted all eyes to its burning fires, was the
particular object of attention. After long observation, they succeeded
in determining its distance as 92 trillion kilometers (57 trillion
miles). Light, that radiates through space at a velocity of 300000
kilometers (186000 miles) per second, takes no less than ten years to
reach us from this sun, which, nevertheless, is one of our neighbors.

The Little Dog, in which Procyon ([alpha], of first magnitude) shines
out, is above its big brother. With the exception of [alpha], it has no
bright stars.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.--Winter Constellations.]

Lastly, toward the southern horizon, we must notice the Hydra, Eridanus,
the Whale, the Southern Fish, the Ship, and the Centaur. This last
constellation, while invisible to our latitudes, contains the star that
is nearest to the Earth, [alpha], of first magnitude, the distance of
which is 40 trillion kilometers (25 trillion miles).

[Illustration: FIG. 14.--Spring Constellations.]

The feet of the Centaur touch the Southern Cross, which is always
invisible to us, and a little farther down the Southern Pole reigns
over the icy desert of the antarctic regions.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.--Summer Constellations.]

[Illustration: FIG. 16.--Autumn Constellations.]

In order to complete the preceding descriptions, we subjoin four charts
representing the aspect of the starry heavens during the evenings of
winter, spring, summer, and autumn. To make use of these, we must
suppose them to be placed above our heads, the center marking the
zenith, and the sky descending all round to the horizon. The horizon,
therefore, bounds these panoramas. Turning the chart in any direction,
and looking at it from north, south, east, or west, we find all the
principal stars. The first map (Fig. 13) represents the sky in winter
(January) at 8 P.M.; the second, in spring (April) at 9 P.M.; the third,
in summer (July) at the same hour; the fourth, the sky in autumn
(October) at the same time.

And so, at little cost, we have made one of the grandest and most
beautiful journeys conceivable. We now have a new country, or, better,
have learned to see and know our own country, for since the Earth is a
planet we must all be citizens of the Heavens before we can belong to
such or such a nation of our lilliputian world.

We must now study this sublime spectacle of the Heavens in detail.




CHAPTER III

THE STARS, SUNS OF THE INFINITE

A JOURNEY THROUGH SPACE


We have seen from the foregoing summary of the principal Constellations
that there is great diversity in the brightness of the stars, and that
while our eyes are dazzled with the brilliancy of certain orbs, others,
on the contrary, sparkle modestly in the azure depths of the night, and
are hardly perceptible to the eye that seeks to plumb the abysses of
Immensity.

We have appended the word "magnitude" to the names of certain stars, and
the reader might imagine this to bear some relation to the volume of the
orb. But this is not the case.

To facilitate the observation of stars of varying brilliancy, they have
been classified in order of magnitude, according to their apparent
brightness, and since the dimensions of these distant suns are almost
wholly unknown to us, the most luminous stars were naturally denoted as
of first magnitude, those which were a little less bright of the second,
and so on. But in reality this word "magnitude" is quite erroneous, for
it bears no relation to the mass of the stars, divided thus at an epoch
when it was supposed that the most brilliant must be the largest. It
simply indicates the apparent brightness of a star, the real brilliancy
depending on its dimensions, its intrinsic light, and its distance from
our planet.

And now to make some comparison between the different orders. Throughout
the entire firmament, only nineteen stars of first magnitude are
discoverable. And, strictly speaking, the last of this series might just
as well be noted of "second magnitude," while the first of the second
series might be added to the list of stars of the "first order." But in
order to form classes distinct from one another, some limit has to be
adopted, and it was determined that the first series should include only
the following stars, the most luminous in the Heavens, which are
subjoined in order of decreasing brilliancy.


STARS OF THE FIRST MAGNITUDE

           1. Sirius, or [alpha] of the Great Dog.
           2. Canopus, or [alpha] of the Ship.
           3. Capella, or [alpha] of the Charioteer.
           4. Arcturus, or [alpha] of the Herdsman.
           5. Vega, or [alpha] of the Lyre.
           6. Proxima, or [alpha] of the Centaur.
           7. Rigel, or [beta] of Orion.
           8. Achernar, or [alpha] of Eridanus.
           9. Procyon, or [alpha] of the Little Dog.
          10. [beta] of the Centaur.
          11. Betelgeuse, or [alpha] of Orion.
          12. Altaïr, or [alpha] of the Eagle.
          13. [alpha] of the Southern Cross.
          14. Aldebaran, or [alpha] of the Bull.
          15. Spica, or [alpha] of the Virgin.
          16. Antares, or [alpha] of the Scorpion.
          17. Pollux, or [beta] of the Twins.
          18. Regulus, or [alpha] of the Lion.
          19. Fomalhaut, or [alpha] of the Southern Fish.


THE STARS OF THE SECOND MAGNITUDE

Then come the stars of the second magnitude, of which there are
fifty-nine. The stars of the Great Bear (with the exception of [delta],
which is of third magnitude), the Pole-Star, the chief stars in Orion
(after Rigel and Betelgeuse), of the Lion, of Pegasus, of Andromeda, of
Cassiopeia, are of this order. These, with the former, constitute the
principal outlines of the constellations visible to us.

Then follow the third and fourth magnitudes, and so on.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following table gives a summary of the series, down to the sixth
magnitude, which is the limit of visibility for the unaided human eye:

             19 stars of first magnitude.
             59 of second magnitude.
            182 of third magnitude.
            530 of fourth magnitude.
          1,600 of fifth magnitude.
          4,800 of sixth magnitude.

This makes a total of some seven thousand stars visible to the unaided
eye. It will be seen that each series is, roughly speaking, three times
as populated as that preceding it; consequently, if we multiply the
number of any class by three, we obtain the approximate number of stars
that make up the class succeeding it.

Seven thousand stars! It is an imposing figure, when one reflects that
all these lucid points are suns, as enormous as they are potent, as
incandescent as our own (which exceeds the volume of the Earth by more
than a million times), distant centers of light and heat, exerting their
attraction on unknown systems. And yet it is generally imagined that
millions of stars are visible in the firmament. This is an illusion;
even the best vision is unable to distinguish stars below the sixth
magnitude, and ordinary sight is far from discovering all of these.

Again, seven thousand stars for the whole Heavens makes only three
thousand five hundred for half the sky. And we can only see one
celestial hemisphere at a time. Moreover, toward the horizon, the vapor
of the atmosphere veils the little stars of sixth magnitude. In reality,
we never see at a given moment more than three thousand stars. This
number is below that of the population of a small town.

       *       *       *       *       *

But celestial space is unlimited, and we must not suppose that these
seven thousand stars that fascinate our eyes and enrich our Heavens,
without which our nights would be black, dark, and empty,[5] comprise
the whole of Creation. They only represent the vestibule of the temple.

Where our vision is arrested, a larger, more powerful eye, that is
developing from century to century, plunges its analyzing gaze into the
abysses, and reflects back to the insatiable curiosity of science the
light of the innumerable suns that it discovers. This eye is the lens of
the optical instruments. Even opera-glasses disclose stars of the
seventh magnitude. A small astronomical objective penetrates to the
eighth and ninth orders. More powerful instruments attain the tenth.
The Heavens are progressively transformed to the eye of the astronomer,
and soon he is able to reckon hundreds of thousands of orbs in the
night. The evolution continues, the power of the instrument is
developed; and the stars of the eleventh and twelfth magnitudes are
discovered successively, and together number four millions. Then follow
the thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth magnitudes. This is the
sequence:

           7th magnitude          13000.
           8th     "              40000.
           9th     "             120000.
          10th     "             380000.
          11th     "           1000000.
          12th     "           3000000.
          13th     "           9000000.
          14th     "          27000000.
          15th     "          80000000.

Accordingly, the most powerful telescopes of the day, reenforced by
celestial photography, can bring a stream of more than 120 millions of
stars into the scope of our vision.

The photographic map of the Heavens now being executed comprises the
first fourteen magnitudes, and will give the precise position of some
40000000 stars, distributed over 22,054 sheets, forming a sphere 3
meters 44 centimeters in diameter.

The boldest imagination is overwhelmed by these figures, and fails to
picture such millions of suns--formidable and burning globes that roll
through space, sweeping their systems along with them. What furnaces are
there! what unknown lives! what vast immensities!

And again, what enormous distances must separate the stars, to admit of
their free revolution in the ether! In what abysses, at what a distance
from our terrestrial atom, must these magnificent and dazzling Suns
pursue the paths traced for them by Destiny!

       *       *       *       *       *

If all the stars radiated an equal light, their distances might be
calculated on the principle that an object appears smaller in proportion
to its distance. But this equality does not exist. The suns were not all
cast in the same mold.

Indeed, the stars differ widely in size and brightness, and the
distances that have been measured show that the most brilliant are not
the nearest. They are scattered through Space at all distances.

Among the nearer stars of which it has been found possible to calculate
the distance, some are found to be of the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh,
eighth, and even ninth magnitudes, proving that the most brilliant are
not always the least distant.

For the rest, among the beautiful and shining stars with which we made
acquaintance in the last chapter may be cited Sirius, which at a
distance of 92 trillion kilometers (57 trillion miles) from here still
dazzles us with its burning fires; Procyon or [alpha] of the Little Dog,
as remote as 112 trillion kilometers (69-1/2 trillion miles); Altaïr of
the Eagle, at 160 trillion kilometers (99 trillion miles); the white
Vega, at 204 trillion kilometers (126-1/2 trillion miles); Capella, at
276 trillion kilometers (171 trillion miles); and the Pole-Star at 344
trillion kilometers (213-1/2 trillion miles). The light that flies
through Space at a velocity of 300000 kilometers (186000 miles) per
second, takes thirty-six years and a half to reach us from this distant
sun: _i.e._, the luminous ray we are now receiving from Polaris has been
traveling for more than the third of a century. When you, gentle reader,
were born, the ray that arrives to-day from the Pole-Star was already
speeding on its way. In the first second after it had started it
traveled 300000 kilometers; in the second it added another 300000
which at once makes 600000 kilometers; add another 300000 kilometers
for the third second, and so on during the thirty-six years and a half.

If we tried to arrange the number 300000 (which represents the distance
accomplished in one second) in superposed rows, as if for an addition
sum, as many times as is necessary to obtain the distance that
separates the Pole-Star from our Earth, the necessary operation would
comprise 1,151,064000 rows, and the sheet of paper required for the
setting out of such a sum would measure approximately 11,510 kilometers
(about 7000 miles), _i.e._, almost the diameter of our terrestrial
globe, or about four times the distance from Paris to Moscow!

Is it not impossible to realize that our Sun, with its entire system, is
lost in the Heavens at such a distance from his peers in Space? At the
distance of the least remote of the stars he would appear as one of the
smallest.

       *       *       *       *       *

The nearest star to us is [alpha] of the Centaur, of first magnitude, a
neighbor of the South Pole, invisible in our latitudes. Its distance is
275000 radii of the terrestrial orbit, _i.e._, 275000 times 149
million kilometers, which gives 41 trillions, or 41000 milliards of
kilometers (= 25-1/2 trillion miles). [A milliard = 1000 millions, the
French billion. A trillion = 1000 milliards, or a million millions, the
English billion. The _French_ nomenclature has been retained by the
translator.] At a speed of 300000 kilometers (186000 miles) per second
the light takes four years to come from thence. It is a fine double
star.

The next nearest star after this is a little orb invisible to the
unaided eye. It has no name, and stands as No. 21,185 in the Catalogue
of Lalande. It almost attains the seventh magnitude (6.8). Its distance
is 64 trillion kilometers (39-1/2 trillion miles).

The third of which the distance has been measured is the small star in
Cygnus, already referred to in Chapter II, in describing the
Constellations. Its distance is 69 trillion kilometers (42-1/2 trillion
miles). This, too, is a double star. The light takes seven years to
reach us.

As we have seen, the fine stars Sirius, Procyon, Aldebaran, Altaïr,
Vega, and Capella are more remote.

Our solar system is thus very isolated in the vastness of Infinitude.
The latest known planet of our system, Neptune, performs its revolutions
in space at 4 milliards, 470 million kilometers (2,771,400000 miles)
from our Sun. Even this is a respectable distance! But beyond this
world, an immense gulf, almost a void abyss, extends to the nearest
star, [alpha] of the Centaur. Between Neptune and Centauris there is no
star to cheer the black and cold solitude of the immense vacuum. One or
two unknown planets, some wandering comets, and swarms of meteors,
doubtless traverse those unknown spaces, but all invisible to us.

Later on we will discuss the methods that have been employed in
measuring these distances. Let us now continue our description.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now that we have some notion of the distance of the stars we must
approach them with the telescope, and compare them one with another.

Let us, for example, get close to Sirius: in this star we admire a sun
that is several times heavier than our own, and of much greater mass,
accompanied by a second sun that revolves round it in fifty years. Its
light is exceedingly white, and it notably burns with hydrogen flames,
like Vega and Altaïr.

Now let us approach Arcturus, Capella, Aldebaran: these are yellow stars
with golden rays, like our Sun, and the vapor of iron, of sodium, and of
many other metals can be identified in their spectrum. These stars are
older than the first, and the ruddy ones, such as Antares, Betelgeuse,
[alpha] of Hercules, are still older; several of them are variable, and
are on their way to final extinction.

The Heavens afford us a perennial store of treasure, wherein the
thinker, poet or artist can find inexhaustible subjects of
contemplation.

You have heard of the celestial jewels, the diamonds, rubies, emeralds,
sapphires, topazes, and other precious stones of the sidereal casket.
These marvels are met with especially among the double stars.

Our Sun, white and solitary, gives no idea of the real aspect of some of
its brothers in Infinitude. There are as many different types as there
are suns!

Stars, you will think, are like individuals: each has its distinct
characteristics: no two are comparable. And indeed this reflection is
justified. While human vanity does homage to Phoebus, divine King of
the Heavens, other suns of still greater magnificence form groups of two
or three splendid orbs, which roll the prodigious combinations of their
double, triple, or multiple systems through space, pouring on to the
worlds that accompany them a flood of changing light, now blue, now red,
now violet, etc.

In the inexhaustible variety of Creation there exist Suns that are
united in pairs, bound by a common destiny, cradled in the same
attraction, and often colored in the most delicate and entrancing shades
conceivable. Here will be a dazzling ruby, its glowing color shedding
joy; there a deep blue sapphire of tender tone; beyond, the finest
emeralds, hue of hope. Diamonds of translucent purity and whiteness
sparkle from the abyss, and shed their penetrating light into the vast
space. What splendors are scattered broadcast over the sky! what
profusion!

To the naked eye, the groups appear like ordinary stars, mere luminous
points of greater or less brilliancy; but the telescope soon discovers
the beauty of these systems; the star is duplicated into two distinct
suns, in close proximity. These groups of two or several suns are not
merely due to an effect of perspective--_i.e._, the presence of two or
more stars in our line of sight; as a rule they constitute real physical
systems, and these suns, associated in a common lot, rotate round one
another in a more or less rapid period, that varies for each system.

One of the most splendid of these _double stars_, and at the same time
one of the easiest to perceive, is [zeta] in the Great Bear, or Mizar,
mentioned above in describing this constellation. It has no contrasting
colors, but exactly resembles twin diamonds of the finest water, which
fascinate the gaze, even through a small objective.

Its components are of the second and fourth magnitudes, their distance =
14"[6]. Some idea of their appearance in a small telescope may be
obtained from the subjoined figure (Fig. 17).

Another very brilliant pair is Castor. Magnitudes second and third.
Distance 5.6"". Very easy to observe. [gamma] in the Virgin resolves
into two splendid diamonds of third magnitude. Distance, 5.0". Another
double star is [gamma] of the Ram, of fourth magnitude. Distance, 8.9".

[Illustration: FIG. 17.--The double star Mizar.]

And here are two that are even more curious by reason of their coloring:
[gamma] in Andromeda, composed of a fine orange star, and one
emerald-green, which again is accompanied by a tiny comrade of the
deepest blue. This group in a good telescope is most attractive.
Magnitudes, second and fifth. Distance, 10".

[beta] of the Swan, or Albireo, referred to in the last chapter, has
been analyzed into two stars: one golden-yellow, the other sapphire.
Magnitudes, third and fifth. Distance, 34". [alpha] of the Greyhounds,
known also as the Heart of Charles II, is golden-yellow and lilac.
Magnitudes, third and fifth. Distance 20".[7]

[alpha] of Hercules revolves a splendid emerald and a ruby in the skies;
[zeta] of the Lyre exhibits a yellow and a green star; Rigel, an
electric sun, and a small sapphire; Antares is ruddy and emerald-green;
[eta] of Perseus resolves into a burning red star, and one smaller that
is deep blue, and so on.

       *       *       *       *       *

These exquisite double stars revolve in gracious and splendid couples
around one another, as in some majestic valse, marrying their
multi-colored fires in the midst of the starry firmament.

Here, we constantly receive a pure and dazzling white light from our
burning luminary. Its ray, indeed, contains the potentiality of every
conceivable color, but picture the fantastic illumination of the worlds
that gravitate round these multiple and colored suns as they shed floods
of blue and roseate, red, or orange light around them! What a fairy
spectacle must life present upon these distant universes!

Let us suppose that we inhabit a planet illuminated by two suns, one
blue, the other red.

It is morning. The sapphire sun climbs slowly up the Heavens, coloring
the atmosphere with a somber and almost melancholy hue. The blue disk
attains the zenith, and is beginning its descent toward the West, when
the East lights up with the flames of a scarlet sun, which in its turn
ascends the heights of the firmament. The West is plunged in the
penumbra of the rays of the blue sun, while the East is illuminated with
the purple and burning rays of the ruby orb.

The first sun is setting when the second noon shines for the inhabitants
of this strange world. But the red sun, too, accomplishes the law of its
destiny. Hardly has it disappeared in the conflagration of its last
rays, with which the West is flushed, when the blue orb reappears on the
opposite side, shedding a pale azure light upon the world it
illuminates, which knows no night. And thus these two suns fraternize in
the Heavens over the common task of renewing a thousand effects of
extra-terrestrial light for the globes that are subject to their
variations.

Scarlet, indigo, green, and golden suns; pearly and multi-colored Moons;
are these not fairy visions, dazzling to our poor sight, condemned while
here below to see and know but one white Sun?

As we have learned, there are not only double, but triple, and also
multiple stars. One of the finest ternary systems is that of [gamma] in
Andromeda, above mentioned. Its large star is orange, its second green,
its third blue, but the two last are in close juxtaposition, and a
powerful telescope is needed to separate them. A triple star more easy
to observe is [zeta] of Cancer, composed of three orbs of fifth
magnitude, at a distance of 1" and 5"; the first two revolve round their
common center of gravity in fifty-nine years, the third takes over three
hundred years. The preceding figure shows this system in a fairly
powerful objective (Fig. 18).

[Illustration: FIG. 18.--Triple star [zeta] in Cancer.]

In the Lyre, a little above the dazzling Vega, [epsilon] is of fourth
magnitude, which seems a little elongated to the unaided eye, and can
even be analyzed into two contiguous stars by very sharp sight. But on
examining this attractive pair with a small glass, it is further obvious
that each of these stars is double; so that they form a splendid
quadruple system of two couples (Fig. 19): one of fifth and a half and
sixth magnitudes, at a distance of 2.4", the other of sixth and
seventh, 3.2" distant. The distance between the two pairs is 207".

[Illustration: FIG. 19.--Quadruple star [epsilon] of the Lyre.]

In speaking of Orion, we referred to the marvelous star [theta] situated
in the no less famous Nebula, below the Belt; this star forms a
dazzling sextuple system, in the very heart of the nebula (Fig. 20). How
different to our Sun, sailing through Space in modest isolation!

Be it noted that all these stars are animated by prodigious motions that
impel them in every direction.

[Illustration: FIG. 20.--Sextuple star [theta] in the Nebula of Orion.]

There are no fixed stars. On every side throughout Infinity, the burning
suns--enormous globes, blazing centers of light and heat--are flying at
giddy speed toward an unknown goal, traversing millions of miles each
day, crossing century by century such vast spaces as are inconceivable
to the human intellect.

If the stars appear motionless to us, it is because they are so remote,
their secular movements being only manifested on the celestial sphere by
imperceptible displacements. But in reality these suns are in perpetual
commotion in the abysses of the Heavens, which they quicken with an
extraordinary animation.

These perpetual and cumulative motions must eventually modify the aspect
of the Constellations: but these changes will only take effect very
slowly; and for thousands and thousands of years longer the heroes and
heroines of mythology will keep their respective places in the Heavens,
and reign undisturbed beneath the starry vault.

Examination of these star motions reveals the fact that our Sun is
plunging with all his system (the Earth included) toward the
Constellation of Hercules. We are changing our position every moment: in
an hour we shall be 70000 kilometers (43,500 miles) farther than we are
at present. The Sun and the Earth will never again traverse the space
they have just left, and which they have deserted forever.

And here let us pause for an instant to consider the _variable stars_.
Our Sun, which is constant and uniform in its light, does not set the
type of all the stars. A great number of them are variable--either
periodically, in regular cycles--or irregularly.

We are already acquainted with the variations of Algol, in Perseus, due
to its partial eclipse by a dark globe gravitating in the line of our
vision. There are several others of the same type: these are not,
properly speaking, variable stars. But there are many others the
intrinsic light of which undergoes actual variations.

In order to realize this, let us imagine that our Earth belongs to such
a sun, for example, to a star in the southern constellation of the
Whale, indicated by the letter [omicron], which has been named the
"wonderful" (Mira Ceti). Our new sun is shining to-day with a dazzling
light, shedding the gladness of his joyous beams upon nature and in our
hearts. For two months we admire the superb orb, sparkling in the azure
illuminated with its radiance. Then of a sudden, its light fades, and
diminishes in intensity, though the sky remains clear. Imperceptibly,
our fine sun darkens; the atmosphere becomes sad and dull, there is an
anticipation of universal death. For five long months our world is
plunged in a kind of penumbra; all nature is saddened in the general
woe.

But while we are bewailing the cruelty of our lot, our cherished
luminary revives. The intensity of its light increases slowly. Its
brilliancy augments, and finally, at the end of three months, it has
recovered its former splendors, and showers its bright beams upon our
world, flooding it with joy. But--we must not rejoice too quickly! This
splendid blaze will not endure. The flaming star will pale once more;
fade back to its minimum; and then again revive. Such is the nature of
this capricious sun. It varies in three hundred and thirty-one days, and
from yellow at the maximum, turns red at the minimum. This star, Mira
Ceti, which is one of the most curious of its type, varies from the
second to the ninth magnitudes: we cite it as one example; hundreds of
others might be instanced.

Thus the sky is no black curtain dotted with brilliant points, no empty
desert, silent and monotonous. It is a prodigious theater on which the
most fantastic plays are continually being acted. Only--there are no
spectators.

Again, we must note the _temporary stars_, which shine for a certain
time, and then die out rapidly. Such was the star in Cassiopeia, in
1572, the light of which exceeded Sirius in its visibility in full
daylight, burning for five months with unparalleled splendor, dominating
all other stars of first magnitude; after which it died out gradually,
disappearing at the end of seventeen months, to the terror of the
peoples, who saw in it the harbinger of the world's end: that of 1604,
in the Constellation of the Serpent, which shone for a year; of 1866, of
second magnitude, in the Northern Crown, which appeared for a few weeks
only; of 1876, in the Swan; of 1885, in the Nebula of Andromeda; of
1891, in the Charioteer; and quite recently, of 1901, in Perseus.

These temporary stars, which appear spontaneously to the observers on
the Earth, and quickly vanish again, are doubtless due to collisions,
conflagrations, or celestial cataclysms. But we only see them long after
the epoch at which the phenomena occurred, years upon years, and
centuries ago. For instance, the conflagration photographed by the
author in 1901, in Perseus, must have occurred in the time of Queen
Elizabeth. It has taken all this time for the rays of light to reach us.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Heavens are full of surprises, on which we can bestow but a fleeting
glance within these limits. They present a field of infinite variety.

Who has not noticed the Milky Way, the pale belt that traverses the
entire firmament and is so luminous on clear evenings in the
Constellations of the Swan and the Lyre? It is indeed a swarm of stars.
Each is individually too small to excite our retina, but as a whole,
curiously enough, they are perfectly visible. With opera-glasses we
divine the starry constitution: a small telescope shows us marvels.
Eighteen millions of stars were counted there with the gauges of William
Herschel.

Now this Milky Way is a symbol, not of the Universe, but of the
Universes that succeed each other through the vast spaces to Infinity.

Our Sun is a star of the Milky Way. It surrounds us like a great circle,
and if the Earth were transparent, we should see it pass beneath our
feet as well as over our heads. It consists of a very considerable mass
of star-clusters, varying greatly in extent and number, some projected
in front of others, while the whole forms an agglomeration.

[Illustration: FIG. 21.--The Star-Cluster in Hercules.]

Among this mass of star-groups, several thousands of which are already
known to us, we will select one of the most curious, the Cluster in
Hercules, which can be distinguished with the unaided eye, between the
stars [eta] and [zeta] of that constellation. Many photographs of it
have been taken in the author's observatory at Juvisy, showing some
thousands of stars; and one of these is reproduced in the accompanying
figure (Fig. 21). Is it not a veritable universe?

[Illustration: FIG. 22.--The Star-Cluster in the Centaur.]

Another of the most beautiful, on account of its regularity, is that of
the Centaur (Fig. 22).

These groups often assume the most extraordinary shapes in the
telescope, such as crowns, fishes, crabs, open mouths, birds with
outspread wings, etc.

We must also note the _gaseous nebulæ_, universes in the making,
_e.g._, the famous Nebula in Orion, of which we obtained some notion a
while ago in connection with its sextuple star: and also that in
Andromeda (Fig. 23).

[Illustration: FIG. 23.--The Nebula in Andromeda.]

[Illustration: FIG. 24.--Nebula in the Greyhounds.]

Perhaps the most marvelous of all is that of the Greyhounds, which
evolves in gigantic spirals round a dazzling focus, and then loses
itself far off in the recesses of space. Fig. 24 gives a picture of it.

[Illustration: FIG. 25.--The Pleiades.]

Without going thus far, and penetrating into telescopic depths, my
readers can get some notion of these star-clusters with the help of a
small telescope or opera-glasses, or even with the unaided eye, by
looking at the beautiful group of the Pleiades, already familiar to us
on another page, and using it as a test of vision. The little map
subjoined (Fig. 25) will be an assistance in recognizing them, and in
estimating their magnitudes, which are in the following order:

          Alcyone    3.0.
          Electra    4.5.
          Atlas      4.6.
          Maia       5.0.
          Merope     5.5.
          Taygeta    5.8.
          Pleione    6.3.
          Celæno     6.5.
          Asterope   6.8.

Good eyes distinguish the first six, sharp sight detects the three
others.

In the times of the ancient Greeks, seven were accounted of equal
brilliancy, and the poets related that the seventh star had fled at the
time of the Trojan War. Ovid adds that she was mortified at not being
embraced by a god, as were her six sisters. It is probable that only the
best sight could then distinguish Pleione, as in our own day. The
angular distance from Atlas to Pleione is 5'.

The length of this republic, from Atlas and Pleione to Celæno, is 4'/23"
of time, or 1°6' of arc; the breadth, from Merope to Asterope, is
36'.[8]

In the quadrilateral, the length from Alcyone to Electra is 36', and the
breadth from Merope to Maia 25'. To us it appears as though, if the Full
Moon were placed in front of this group of nine stars, she would cover
it entirely, for to the naked eye she appears much larger than all the
Pleiades together. But this is not so. She only measures 31', less than
half the distance from Atlas to Celæno; she is hardly broader than the
distance from Alcyone to Atlas, and could pass between Merope and
Taygeta without touching either of these stars. This is a perennial and
very curious optical illusion. When the Moon passes in front of the
Pleiades, and occults them successively, it is hard to believe one's
eyes. The fact occurred, _e.g._, on July 23, 1897, during a fine
occultation observed at the author's laboratory of Juvisy (Fig. 26).

[Illustration: FIG. 26.--Occultation of the Pleiades by the Moon.]

Photography here discovers to us, not 6, 9, 12, 15, or 20 stars, but
hundreds and millions.

These are the most brilliant flowers of the celestial garden.

[Illustration: FIG. 27.--Stellar dial of the double star [gamma] of the
Virgin.]

We, alas, can but glance at them rapidly. In contemplating them we are
transported into immensities both of space and time, for the stellar
periods measured by these distant universes often overpower in their
magnitude the rapid years in which our terrestrial days are estimated.
For instance, one of the double stars we spoke of above, [gamma] of the
Virgin, sees its two components, translucent diamonds, revolve around
their common center of gravity, in one hundred and eighty years. How
many events took place in France, let us say, in a single year of this
star!--The Regency, Louis XV, Louis XVI, the Revolution, Napoleon, Louis
XVIII, Louis Philippe, the Second Republic, Napoleon III, the
Franco-German War, the Third Republic.... What revolutions here, during
a single year of this radiant pair! (Fig. 27.)

But the pageant of the Heavens is too vast, too overwhelming. We must
end our survey.

Our Milky Way, with its millions of stars, represents for us only a
portion of the Creation. The illimitable abysses of Infinitude are
peopled by other universes as vast, as imposing, as our own, which are
renewed in all directions through the depths of Space to endless
distance. Where is our little Earth? Where our Solar System? We are fain
to fold our wings, and return from the Immense and Infinite to our
floating island.




CHAPTER IV

OUR STAR THE SUN


In the incessant agitation of daily life in which we are involved by the
thousand superfluous wants of modern "civilization," one is prone to
assume that existence is complete only when it reckons to the good an
incalculable number of petty incidents, each more insignificant than the
last. Why lose time in thinking or dreaming? We must live at fever heat,
must agitate, and be infatuated for inanities, must create imaginary
desires and torments.

The thoughtful mind, prone to contemplation and admiration of the
beauties of Nature, is ill at ease in this perpetual vortex that
swallows everything--satisfaction, in a life that one has not time to
relish; love of the beautiful, that one views with indifference; it is a
whirlpool that perpetually hides Truth from us, forgotten forever at the
bottom of her well.

And why are our lives thus absorbed in merely material interests? To
satisfy our pride and vanity! To make ourselves slaves to chimeras! If
the Moon were inhabited, and if her denizens could see us plainly
enough to note and analyze the details of human existence on the surface
of our planet, it would be curious and perhaps a little humiliating for
us, to see their statistics. What! we should say, is this the sum of our
lives? Is it for this that we struggle, and suffer, and die? Truly it is
futile to give ourselves such trouble.

And yet the remedy is simple, within the power of every one; but one
does not think of it just because it is too easy, although it has the
immense advantage of lifting us out of the miseries of this weary world
toward the inexpressible happiness that must always awaken in us with
the knowledge of the Truth: we need only open our eyes to see, and to
look out. Only--one hardly ever thinks of it, and it is easier to let
one's self be blinded by the illusion and false glamor of appearances.

Think what it would be to consecrate an hour each day to voluntary
participation in the harmonious Choir of Nature, to raise one's eyes
toward the Heavens, to share the lessons taught by the Pageant of the
Universe! But, no: there is no time, no time for the intellectual life,
no time to become attached to real interests, no time to pursue them.

Among the objects marshaled for us in the immense spectacle of Nature,
nothing without exception has struck the admiration and attention of
man as much as the Sun, the God of Light, the fecundating orb, without
which our planet and its life would never have issued from nonentity,
_the visible image of the invisible god_, as said Cicero, and the poets
of antiquity. And yet how many beyond the circle of those likely to read
these pages know that this Sun is a star in the Milky Way, and that
every star is a sun? How many take any account of the reality and
grandeur of the Universe? Inquire, and you will find that the number of
people who have any notion, however rudimentary, of its construction, is
singularly restricted. Humanity is content to vegetate, much after the
fashion of a race of moles.

Henceforward, you will know that you are living in the rays of a star,
which, from its proximity, we term a sun. To the inhabitants of other
systems of worlds, our splendid Sun is only a more or less brilliant,
luminous point, according as the spot from which it is observed is
nearer or farther off. But to us its "terrestrial" importance renders it
particularly precious; we forget all the sister stars on its account,
and even the most ignorant hail it with enthusiasm without exactly
knowing what its rôle in the universe may be, simply because they feel
that they depend on it, and that without it life would become extinct on
this globe. Yes, it is the beneficent rays of the Sun that shed upon
our Earth the floods of light and heat to which Life owes its existence
and its perpetual propagation.

Hail, vast Sun! a little star in Infinitude, but for us a colossal and
portentous luminary. Hail, divine Benefactor! How should we not adore,
when we owe him the glow of the warm and cheery days of summer, the
gentle caresses by which his rays touch the undulating ears, and gild
them with the touch? The Sun sustains our globe in Space, and keeps it
within his rays by the mysteriously powerful and delicate cords of
attraction. It is the Sun that we inhale from the embalmed corollas of
the flowers that uplift their gracious heads toward his light, and
reflect his splendors back to us. It is the Sun that sparkles in the
foam of the merry wine; that charms our gaze in those first days of
spring, when the home of the human race is adorned with all the charms
of verdant and flowering youth. Everywhere we find the Sun; everywhere
we recognize his work, extending from the infinitely great to the
infinitely little. We bow to his might, and admire his power. When in
the sad winter day he disappears behind the snowy eaves, we think his
fiery globe will never rise to mitigate the short December days which
are alleviated with his languid beams.

April restores him to superb majesty, and our hearts are filled with
hope in the illumination of those beauteous, sunny hours.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our celestial journey carried us far indeed from our own Solar System.
Guided by the penetrating eye of the telescope, we reached such distant
creations that we lost sight of our cherished luminary.

But we remember that he burns yonder, in the midst of the pale cosmic
cloud we term the Milky Way. Let us approach him, now that we have
visited the Isles of Light in the Celestial Ocean; let us traverse the
vast plains strewn with the burning gold of the Suns of the Infinite.

We embark upon a ray of light, and glide rapidly to the portals of our
Universe. Soon we perceive a tiny speck, scintillating feebly in the
depths of Space, and recognize it as our own celestial quarters. This
little star shines like the head of a gold pin, and increases in size as
we advance toward it. We traverse a few more trillion miles in our rapid
course, and it shines out like a fine star of the first magnitude. It
grows larger and larger. Soon we divine that it is our humble Earth that
is shining before us, and gladly alight upon her. In future we shall not
quit our own province of the Celestial Kingdom, but will enter into
relations with this solar family, which interests us the more in that it
affects us so closely.

[Illustration: FIG. 28.--Comparative sizes of the Sun and Earth.]

The Sun, which is manifested to us as a fine white disk at noon, while
it is fiery red in the evening, at its setting, is an immense globe,
whose colossal dimensions surpass those of our terrestrial atom beyond
all conceivable proportion.

In diameter, it is, in effect, 108-1/2 times as large as the Earth; that
is to say, if our planet be represented by a globe 1 meter in diameter,
the Sun would figure as a sphere 108-1/2 meters across. This is shown on
the accompanying figure (Fig. 28), which is in exact proportion.

If our world were set down upon the Sun, with all its magnificence, all
its wealth, its mountains, its seas, its monuments, and its inhabitants,
it would only be an imperceptible speck. It would occupy less space in
the central orb than one grain in a grenade. If the Earth were placed in
the center of the Sun, with the Moon still revolving round it at her
proper distance of 384000 kilometers (238,500 miles), only half the
solar surface would be covered.

In volume the Sun is 1,280000 times vaster than our abode, and 324000
times heavier in mass. That the giant only appears to us as a small
though very brilliant disk, is solely on account of its distance. Its
apparent dimensions by no means reveal its majestic proportions to us.

When observed with astronomical instruments, or photographed, we
discover that its surface is not smooth, as might be supposed, but
granulated, presenting a number of luminous points dispersed over a
more somber background. These granulations are somewhat like the pores
of a fruit, _e.g._, a fine orange, the color of which recalls the hue of
the Sun when it sinks in the evening, and prepares to plunge us into
darkness. At times these pores open under the influence of disturbances
that arise upon the solar surface, and give birth to a Sun-Spot. For
centuries scientists and lay people alike refused to admit the existence
of these spots, regarding them as so many blemishes upon the King of the
Heavens. Was not the Sun the emblem of inviolable purity? To find any
defect in him were to do him grievous injury. Since the orb of day was
incorruptible, those who threw doubt on his immaculate splendor were
fools and idiots. And so when Scheiner, one of the first who studied the
solar spots with the telescope, published the result of his experiments
in 1610, no one would believe his statements.

Yet, from the observations of Galileo and other astronomers, it became
necessary to accept the evidence, and stranger still to recognize that
it is by these very spots that we are enabled to study the physical
constitution of the Sun.

They are generally rounded or oval in shape, and exhibit two distinct
parts; first, the central portion, which is black, and is called the
_nucleus_, or _umbra_; second, a clearer region, half shaded, which has
received the name of _penumbra_. These parts are sharply defined in
outline; the penumbra is gray, the nucleus looks black in relation to
the dazzling brilliancy of the solar surface; but as a matter of fact it
radiates a light 2000 times superior in intensity to that of the full
moon.

[Illustration: FIG. 29.--Direct photograph of the Sun.]

Some idea of the aspect of these spots may be obtained from the
accompanying reproduction of a photograph of the Sun (taken September 8,
1898, at the author's observatory at Juvisy), and from the detailed
drawing of the large spot that broke out some days later (September 13),
crossed by a bridge, and furrowed with flames. As a rule, the spots
undergo rapid transformations.

[Illustration: FIG. 30.--Telescopic aspect of a Sun-Spot.]

These spots, which appear of insignificant dimensions to the observers
on the Earth, are in reality absolutely gigantic. Some that have been
measured are ten times as large as the Earth's diameter, _i.e._, 120000
kilometers (74,500 miles).

Sometimes the spots are so large that they can be seen with the unaided
eye (protected with black or dark-blue glasses). They are not formed
instantaneously, but are heralded by a vast commotion on the solar
surface, exhibiting, as it were, luminous waves or _faculæ_. Out of this
agitation arises a little spot, that is usually round, and enlarges
progressively to reach a maximum, after which it diminishes, with
frequent segmentation and shrinkage. Some are visible only for a few
days; others last for months. Some appear, only to be instantly
swallowed in the boiling turmoil of the flaming orb. Sometimes, again,
white incandescent waves emerge, and seem to throw luminous bridges
across the central umbra. As a rule the spots are not very profound.
They are funnel-shaped depressions, inferior in depth to the diameter of
the Earth, which, as we have seen, is 108 times smaller than that of the
Sun.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Sun-Spots are not devoid of motion, and from their movements we
learn that the radiant orb revolves upon itself in about twenty-five
days. This rotation was determined in 1611, by Galileo, who, while
observing the spots, saw that they traversed the solar disk from east
to west, following lines that are oblique to the plane of the ecliptic,
and that they disappear at the western border fourteen days after their
arrival at the eastern edge. Sometimes the same spot, after being
invisible for fourteen days, reappears upon the eastern edge, where it
was observed twenty-eight days previously. It progresses toward the
center of the Sun, which is reached in seven days, disappears anew in
the west, and continues its journey on the hemisphere opposed to us, to
reappear under observation two weeks later, if it has not meantime been
extinguished. This observation proves that the Sun revolves upon itself.
The reappearance of the spots occurs in about twenty-seven days, because
the Earth is not stationary, and in its movement round the burning
focus, a motion effected in the same direction as the solar rotation,
the spots are still visible two and a half days after they disappeared
from the point at which they had been twenty-five days previously. In
reality, the rotation of the Sun occupies twenty-five and a half days,
but strangely enough this globe _does not rotate in one uniform period_,
like the Earth; the rotation periods, or movements of the different
parts of the solar surface, diminish from the Sun's equator toward its
poles. The period is twenty-five days at the equator, twenty-six at the
twenty-fourth degree of latitude, north or south, twenty-seven at the
thirty-seventh degree, twenty-eight at the forty-eighth. The spots are
usually formed between the equator and this latitude, more especially
between the tenth and thirtieth degrees. They have never been seen round
the poles.

Toward the edges of the Sun, again, are very brilliant and highly
luminous regions, which generally surround the spots, and have been
termed _faculæ_ (_facula_, a little torch). These faculæ, which
frequently occupy a very extensive surface, seem to be the seat of
formidable commotions that incessantly revolutionize the face of our
monarch, often, as we said, preceding the spots. They can be detected
right up to the poles.

Our Sun, that appears so calm and majestic, is in reality the seat of
fierce conflagrations. Volcanic eruptions, the most appalling storms,
the worst cataclysms that sometimes disturb our little world, are gentle
zephyrs compared with the solar tempests that engender clouds of fire
capable at one burst of engulfing globes of the dimensions of our
planet.

To compare terrestrial volcanoes with solar eruptions is like comparing
the modest night-light that consumes a midge with the flames of the fire
that destroys a town.

The solar spots vary in a fairly regular period of eleven to twelve
years. In certain years, _e.g._, 1893, they are vast, numerous and
frequent; in other years, _e.g._, 1901, they are few and insignificant.
The statistics are very carefully preserved. Here, for instance, is the
surface showing sun-spots expressed in millionths of the extent of the
visible solar surface:

          1889            78
          1890            99
          1891           569
          1892         1,214
          1893         1,464
          1895           974
          1896           543
          1897           514
          1898           375
          1899           111
          1900            75
          1901            29
          1902            62

The years 1889 and 1901 were _minima_; the year 1893 a _maximum_.

It is a curious fact that terrestrial magnetism and the boreal auroras
exhibit an oscillation parallel to that of the solar spots, and
apparently the same occurs with regard to temperature.

We must regard our sun as a globe of gas in a state of combustion,
burning at high temperature, and giving off a prodigious amount of heat
and light. The dazzling surface of this globe is called a _photosphere_
(light sphere). It is in perpetual motion, like the waves of an ocean of
fire, whose roseate and transparent flames measure some 15000
kilometers (9,300 miles) in height. This stratum of rose-colored flames
has received the name of _chromosphere_ (color sphere). It is
transparent; it is not directly visible, but is seen only during the
total eclipses of the Sun, when the dazzling disk of that luminary is
entirely concealed by the Moon; or with the aid of the spectroscope. The
part of the Sun that we see is its luminous surface, or photosphere.

From this agitated surface there is a constant ejection of gigantic
eruptions, immense jets of flame, geysers of fire, projected at a
terrific speed to prodigious heights.

For years astronomers were greatly perplexed as to the nature of these
incandescent masses, known as prominences, which shot out like
fireworks, and were only visible during the total eclipses of the Sun.
But now, thanks to an ingenious invention of Janssen and Lockyer, these
eruptions can be observed every day in the spectroscope, and have been
registered since 1868, more particularly in Rome and in Catania, where
the Society of Spectroscopists was founded with this especial object,
and publishes monthly bulletins in statistics of the health of the Sun.

These prominences assume all imaginable forms, and often resemble our
own storm-clouds; they rise above the chromosphere with incredible
velocity, often exceeding 200 kilometers (124 miles) per second, and
are carried up to the amazing height of 300000 kilometers (186000
miles).

[Illustration: FIG. 31.--Rose-colored solar flames 228000 kilometers
(141,500 miles) in height, _i.e._, 18 times the diameter of the Earth.]

The Sun is surrounded with these enormous flames on every side;
sometimes they shoot out into space like splendid curving roseate
plumes; at others they rear their luminous heads in the Heavens, like
the cleft and waving leaves of giant palm-trees. Having illustrated a
remarkable type of solar spot, it is interesting to submit to the reader
a precise observation of these curious solar flames. That reproduced
here was observed in Rome, January 30, 1885. It measured 228000
kilometers (141,500 miles) in height, eighteen times the diameter of the
earth (represented alongside in its relative magnitude). (Fig. 31.)

Solar eruptions have been seen to reach, in a few minutes, a height of
more than 100000 kilometers (62000 miles), and then to fall back in a
flaming torrent into that burning and inextinguishable ocean.

Observation, in conjunction with spectral analysis, shows these
prominences to be due to formidable explosions produced within the
actual substance of the Sun, and projecting masses of incandescent
hydrogen into space with considerable force.

Nor is this all. During an eclipse one sees around the black disk of the
Moon as it passes in front of the Sun and intercepts its light, a
brilliant and rosy aureole with long, luminous, branching feathers
streaming out, like aigrettes, which extend a very considerable distance
from the solar surface. This aureole, the nature of which is still
unknown to us, has received the name of _corona_. It is a sort of
immense atmosphere, extremely rarefied. Our superb torch, accordingly,
is a brazier of unparalleled activity--a globe of gas, agitated by
phenomenal tempests whose flaming streamers extend afar. The smallest of
these flames is so potent that it would swallow up our world at a single
breath, like the bombs shot out by Vesuvius, that fall back within the
crater.

What now is the real heat of this incandescent focus? The most accurate
researches estimate the temperature of the surface of the Sun at
7000°C. The internal temperature must be considerably higher. A
crucible of molten iron poured out upon the Sun would be as a stream of
ice and snow.

We can form some idea of this calorific force by making certain
comparisons. Thus, the heat given out appears to be equal to that which
would be emitted by a colossal globe of the same dimensions (that is, as
voluminous as twelve hundred and eighty thousand terrestrial globes),
entirely covered with a layer of incandescent coal 28 kilometers (18
miles) in depth, all burning at equal combustion. The heat emitted by
the Sun, at each second, is equal to that which would result from the
combustion of eleven quadrillions six hundred thousand milliards of tons
of coal, all burning together. This same heat would bring to the boil in
an hour, two trillions nine hundred milliards of cubic kilometers of
water at freezing-point.

Our little planet, gravitating at 149000000 kilometers (93000000
miles) from the Sun, arrests on the way, and utilizes, only the half of
a milliard part of this total radiation.

How is this heat maintained? One of the principal causes of the heat of
the Sun is its condensation. According to all probabilities, the solar
globe represents for us the nucleus of a vast nebula, that extended in
primitive times beyond the orbit of Neptune, and which in its
contraction has finally produced this central focus. In virtue of the
law of transformation of motion into heat, this condensation, which has
not yet reached its limit, suffices to raise this colossal globe to its
level of temperature, and to maintain it there for millions of years. In
addition, a substantial number of meteors is forever falling into it.
This furnace is a true pandemonium.

The Sun weighs three hundred and twenty-four thousand times more than
the Earth--that is to say, eighteen hundred and seventy octillions of
kilograms:

           1,870000000000000000000000000000
          (1,842,364,532,019,704,433,497,536,945 tons).

In Chapter XI we shall explain the methods by which it has been found
possible to weigh the Sun and determine its exact distance.

       *       *       *       *       *

I trust these figures will convey some notion of the importance and
nature of the Sun, the stupendous orb on whose rays our very existence
depends. Its apparent dimension (which is only half a degree, 32', and
would be hidden from sight, like that of the full moon, which is about
the same, by the tip of the little finger held out at arm's length),
represents, as we have seen, a real dimension that is colossal, _i.e._,
1,383000 kilometers (more than 857000 miles), and this is owing to the
enormous distance that separates us from it. This distance of
149000000 kilometers (93000000 miles) is sufficiently hard to
appreciate. Let us say that 11,640 terrestrial globes would be required
to throw a bridge from here to the Sun, while 30 would suffice from the
Earth to the Moon. The Moon is 388 times nearer to us than the Sun. We
may perhaps conceive of this distance by calculating that a train,
moving at constant speed of 1 kilometer (0.6214 mile) a minute, would
take 149000000 minutes, that is to say 103,472 days, or 283 years, to
cross the distance that separates us from this orb. Given the normal
duration of life, neither the travelers who set out for the Sun, nor
their children, nor their grandchildren, would arrive there: only the
seventh generation would reach the goal, and only the fourteenth could
bring us back news of it.

Children often cry for the Moon. If one of these inquisitive little
beings could stretch out its arms to touch the Sun, and burn its fingers
there, it would not feel the burn for one hundred and sixty-seven years
(when it would no longer be an infant), for the nervous impulse of
sensation can only be transmitted from the ends of the fingers to the
brain at a velocity of 28 meters per second.

'Tis long. A cannon-ball would reach the Sun in ten years. Light, that
rapid arrow that flies through space at a velocity of 300000 kilometers
(186000 miles per second), takes only eight minutes seventeen seconds
to traverse this distance.

       *       *       *       *       *

This brilliant Sun is not only sovereign of the Earth; he is also the
head of a vast planetary system.

The orbs that circle round the Sun are opaque bodies, spherical in
shape, receiving their light and heat from the central star, on which
they absolutely depend. The name of planets given to them signifies
"wandering" stars. If you observe the Heavens on a fine starry night,
and are sufficiently acquainted with the principal stars of the Zodiac
as described in a preceding chapter, you may be surprised on certain
evenings to see the figure of some zodiacal constellation slightly
modified by the temporary presence of a brilliant orb perhaps surpassing
in its luminosity the finest stars of the first magnitude.

If you watch this apparition for some weeks, and examine its position
carefully in regard to the adjacent stars, you will observe that it
changes its position more or less slowly in the Heavens. These wandering
orbs, or _planets_, do not shine with intrinsic light; they are
illuminated by the Sun.

The planets, in effect, are bodies as opaque as the Earth, traveling
round the God of Day at a speed proportional to their distance. They
number eight principal orbs, and may be divided into two quite distinct
groups by which we may recognize them: the first comprises four planets,
of relatively small dimensions in comparison with those of the second
group, which are so voluminous that the least important of them is
larger than the other four put together.

In order of distance from the Sun, we first encounter:

          MERCURY, VENUS, THE EARTH, AND MARS

These are the worlds that are nearest to the orb of day.

The four following, and much more remote, are, still in order of
distance:

          JUPITER, SATURN, URANUS, AND NEPTUNE

This second group is separated from the first by a vast space occupied
by quite a little army of minute planets, tiny cosmic bodies, the
largest of which measures little more than 100 kilometers (62 miles) in
diameter, and the smallest some few miles only.

The planets which form these three groups represent the principal
members of the solar family. But the Sun is a patriarch, and each of his
daughters has her own children who, while obeying the paternal influence
of the fiery orb, are also obedient to the world that governs them.
These secondary asters, or _satellites_, follow the planets in their
course, and revolve round them in an ellipse, just as the others rotate
round the Sun. Every one knows the satellite of the Earth, the Moon. All
the other planets of our system have their own moons, some being even
more favored than ourselves in this respect, and having several. Mars
has two; Jupiter, five; Saturn, eight; Uranus, four; and Neptune, one
(at least as yet discovered).

In order to realize the relations between these worlds, we must
appreciate their distances by arranging them in a little table:

                         Distance in    Distance in
                         Millions of    Millions of
                         Kilometers.       Miles.
          Mercury             57              35
          Venus              108              67
          The Earth          149              93
          Mars               226             140
          Jupiter            775             481
          Saturn           1,421             882
          Uranus           2,831           1,755
          Neptune          4,470           2,771

The Sun is at the center (or, more properly speaking, at the focus, for
the planets describe an ellipse) of this system, and controls them.
Neptune is thirty times farther from the Sun than the Earth. These
disparities of distance produce a vast difference in the periods of the
planetary revolutions; for while the Earth revolves round the Sun in a
year, Venus in 224 days, and Mercury in 88, Mars takes nearly 2 years to
accomplish his journey, Jupiter 12 years, Saturn 29, Uranus 84, and
Neptune 165.

Even the planets and their moons do not represent the Sun's complete
paternity. There are further, in the solar republic, certain vagabond
and irregular orbs that travel at a speed that is often most immoderate,
occasionally approaching the Sun, not to be consumed therein, but, as it
appears, to draw from its radiant source the provision of forces
necessary for their perigrinations through space. These are the
_Comets_, which pursue an extremely elongated orbit round the Sun, to
which at times they approximate very closely, at other times being
excessively distant.

And now to recapitulate our knowledge of the Solar Empire. In the first
place, we see a colossal globe of fire dominating and governing the
worlds that belong to him. Around him are grouped planets, in number
eight principal, formed of solid and obscure matter, gravitating round
the central orb. Other secondary orbs, the satellites, revolve round the
planets, which keep them within the sphere of their attraction. And
lastly, the comets, irregular celestial bodies, track the whole extent
of the great solar province. To these might be added the whirlwinds of
meteors, as it were disaggregated comets, which also circle round the
Sun, and give origin to shooting stars, when they come into collision
with the Earth.

Having now a general idea of our celestial family, and an appreciation
of the potent focus that controls it, let us make direct acquaintance
with the several members of which it is composed.




CHAPTER V

THE PLANETS

_A._--MERCURY, VENUS, THE EARTH, MARS


And now we are in the Solar System, at the center, or, better, at the
focus of which burns the immense and dazzling orb. We have appreciated
the grandeur and potency of the solar globe, whose rays spread out in
active waves that bear a fecundating illumination to the worlds that
gravitate round him; we have appreciated the distance that separates the
Sun from the Earth, the third of the planets retained within his domain,
or at least I trust that the comparisons of the times required by
certain moving objects to traverse this distance have enabled us to
conceive it.

We said that the four planets nearest to the Sun are Mercury, at a
distance of 57 million kilometers (35000000 miles); Venus, at 108
million (67000000 miles); the Earth, at 149 million (93000000
miles); and Mars at 226 million (140000000 miles). Let us begin our
planetary journey with these four stations.


MERCURY

A little above the Sun one sometimes sees, now in the West, in the
lingering shimmer of the twilight, now in the East, when the tender
roseate dawn announces the advent of a clear day, a small star of the
first magnitude which remains but a very short time above the horizon,
and then plunges back into the flaming sun. This is Mercury, the agile
and active messenger of Olympus, the god of eloquence, of medicine, of
commerce, and of thieves. One only sees him furtively, from time to
time, at the periods of his greatest elongations, either after the
setting or before the rising of the radiant orb, when he presents the
aspect of a somewhat reddish star.

This planet, like the others, shines only by the reflection of the Sun
whose illumination he receives, and as he is in close juxtaposition with
it, his light is bright enough, though his volume is inconsiderable. He
is smaller than the Earth. His revolution round the Sun being
accomplished in about three months, he passes rapidly, in a month and a
half, from one side to the other of the orb of day, and is alternately a
morning and an evening star. The ancients originally regarded it as two
separate planets; but with attentive observation, they soon perceived
its identity. In our somewhat foggy climates, it can only be discovered
once or twice a year, and then only by looking for it according to the
indications given in the astronomic almanacs.

[Illustration: FIG. 32.--Orbits of the four Planets nearest to the Sun.]

Mercury courses round the Sun at a distance of 57000000 kilometers
(35000000 miles), and accomplishes his revolution in 87 days, 23
hours, 15 minutes; _i.e._, 2 months, 27 days, 23 hours, or a little less
than three of our months. If the conditions of life are the same there
as here, the existence of the Mercurians must be four times as short as
our own. A youth of twenty, awaking to the promise of the life he is
just beginning in this world, is an octogenarian in Mercury. There the
fair sex would indeed be justified in bewailing the transitory nature of
life, and might regret the years that pass too quickly away. Perhaps,
however, they are more philosophic than with us.

[Illustration: FIG. 33.--Orbits of the four Planets farthest from the
Sun.]

The orbit of Mercury, which of course is within that of the Earth, is
not circular, but elliptical, and very eccentric, so elongated that at
certain times of the year this planet is extremely remote from the solar
focus, and receives only half as much heat and light as at the opposite
period; and, in consequence, his distance from the Earth varies
considerably.

[Illustration: FIG. 34.--Mercury near quadrature.]

This globe exhibits _phases_, discovered in the seventeenth century by
Galileo, which recall those of the Moon. They are due to the motions of
the planet round the Sun, and are invisible to the unaided eye, but with
even a small instrument, one can follow the gradations and study Mercury
under every aspect. Sometimes, again, he passes exactly in front of the
Sun, and his disk is projected like a black point upon the luminous
surface of the flaming orb. This occurred, notably, on May 10, 1891, and
November 10, 1894; and the phenomenon will recur on November 12, 1907,
and November 6, 1914.

Mercury is the least of all the worlds in our system (with the exception
of the cosmic fragments that circulate between the orbit of Mars and
that of Jupiter). His volume equals only 5/100 that of the Earth. His
diameter, in comparison with that of our planet, is in the ratio of 373
to 1000 (a little more than 1/3) and measures 4,750 kilometers (2,946
miles). His density is the highest of all the worlds in the great solar
family, and exceeds that of our Earth by about 1/3; but weight there is
less by almost 1/2.

Mercury is enveloped in a very dense, thick atmosphere, which doubtless
sensibly tempers the solar heat, for the Sun exhibits to the Mercurians
a luminous disk about seven times more extensive than that with which we
are familiar on the Earth, and when Mercury is at perihelion (that is,
nearest to the Sun), his inhabitants receive ten times more light and
heat than we obtain at midsummer. In all probability, it would be
impossible for us to set foot on this planet without being shattered by
a sunstroke.

Yet we may well imagine that Nature's fecundity can have engendered
beings there of an organization different from our own, adapted to an
existence in the proximity of fire. What magnificent landscapes may
there be adorned with the luxuriant vegetation that develops rapidly
under an ardent and generous sun?

[Illustration: FIG. 35.--The Earth viewed from Mercury.]

Observations of Mercury are taken under great difficulties, just because
of the immediate proximity of the solar furnace; yet some have detected
patches that might be seas. In any case, these observations are
contradictory and uncertain.

Up to the present it has been impossible to determine the duration of
the rotation. Some astronomers even think that the Sun's close proximity
must have produced strong tides, that would, as it were, have
immobilized the globe of Mercury, just as the Earth has immobilized the
Moon, forcing it perpetually to present the same side to the Sun. From
the point of view of habitation, this situation would be somewhat
peculiar; perpetual day upon the illumined half, perpetual night upon
the other hemisphere, and a fairly large zone of twilight between the
two. Such a condition would indeed be different from the succession of
terrestrial days and nights.

As seen from Mercury, the Earth we inhabit would shine out in the starry
sky[9] as a magnificent orb of first magnitude, with the Moon
alongside, a faithful little companion. They should form a fine double
star, the Earth being a brilliant orb of first magnitude, and the Moon
of third, a charming couple, and admired doubtless as an enchanted and
privileged abode.

It is at midnight during the oppositions of the Earth with the Sun that
our planet is the most beautiful and brilliant, as is Jupiter for
ourselves. The constellations are the same, viewed from Mercury or from
the Earth.

But is this little solar planet inhabited? We do not yet know. We can
only reply: why not?


VENUS

When the sunset atmosphere is crimson with the glorious rays of the King
of Orbs, and all Nature assumes the brooding veil of twilight, the most
indifferent eyes are often attracted and captivated by the presence of a
star that is almost dazzling, and illuminates with its white and limpid
light the heavens darkened by the disappearance of the God of Day.

Hail, Venus, Queen of the Heavens! the "Shepherd's Star," gentle mother
of the loves, goddess of beauty, eternally adored and cherished, sung
and immortalized upon Earth, by poets and artists. Her splendid
brilliancy attracted notice from earliest antiquity, and we find her,
radiant and charming, in the works of the ancients, who erected altars
to her and adorned their poetry with her grace and beauty. Homer calls
her Callisto the Beautiful; Cicero names her Vesper, the evening star,
and Lucifer, the star of the morning--for it was with this divinity as
with Mercury. For a long while she was regarded as two separate planets,
and it was only when it came to be observed that the evening and the
morning star were always in periodic succession, that the identity of
the orb was recognized.

Her radiant splendor created her mythological personality, just as the
agility of Mercury created that of the messenger of the gods.

We do not see her aerial chariot in the Heavens drawn by a flight of
doves with white and fluttering wings, but we follow the lustrous orb
led on through space by solar attraction. And in the beautiful evenings
when she is at her greatest distance from our Sun, the whole world
admires this white and dazzling Venus reigning as sovereign over our
twilight[10] for hours after sunset, and in addition to the _savants_
who are practically occupied with astronomy, millions of eyes are raised
to this celestial splendor, and for a moment millions of human beings
feel some curiosity about the mysteries of the Infinite. The brutalities
of daily life would fain petrify our dreams, but thought is not yet
stifled to the point of checking all aspirations after eternal truth,
and when we gaze at the starry sky it is hard not to ask ourselves the
nature of those other worlds, and the place occupied by our own planet
in the vast concert of sidereal harmony.

[Illustration: FIG. 36.--The Evening Star.]

Even through a small telescope, Venus offers remarkable phases.

[Illustration: FIG. 37.--Successive phases of Venus.]

Fig. 37 gives some notion of the succession of these, and of the
planet's variations in magnitude during its journey round the Sun.
Imagine it to be rotating in a year of 224 days, 16 hours, 49 minutes, 8
seconds at a distance of 108 million kilometers (67000000 miles), the
Earth being at 149 million kilometers (93000000 miles). Like Mercury,
at certain periods it passes between the Sun and ourselves, and as its
illuminated hemisphere is of course turned toward the orb of day, we at
those times perceive only a sharp and very luminous crescent. At such
periods Venus is entirely, so to say, against the Sun, and presents to
us her greatest apparent dimension (Fig. 38). Sometimes, again, like
Mercury, she passes immediately in front of the Sun, forming a perfectly
round black spot; this happened on December 8, 1874, and December 6,
1882; and will recur on June 7, 2004, and June 5, 2012. These transits
have been utilized in celestial geometry in measuring the distance of
the Sun.

You will readily divine that the distance of Venus varies considerably
according to her position in relation to the Earth: when she is between
the Sun and ourselves she is nearest to our world; but it is just at
those times that we see least of her surface, because she exhibits to us
only a slender crescent. Terrestrial astronomers are accordingly very
badly placed for the study of her physical constitution. The best
observations can be made when she is situated to right or left of the
Sun, and shows us about half her illuminated disk--during the day for
choice, because at night there is too much irradiation from her dazzling
light.

These phases were discovered by Galileo, in 1610. His observations were
among the first that confirmed the veracity of the system of Copernicus,
affording an evident example of the movement of the planets round the
sun. They are often visible to the unaided eye with good sight, either
at dusk, or through light clouds.

[Illustration: FIG. 38.--Venus at greatest brilliancy.]

Venus, surrounded by a highly dense and rarefied atmosphere, which
increases the difficulties of observing her surface, might be called the
twin sister of the Earth, so similar are the dimensions of the two
worlds. But, strange as it may seem to the many admirers, who are ready
to hail in her an abode of joy and happiness, it is most probable that
this planet, attractive as she is at a distance, would be a less
desirable habitation than our floating island. In fact, the atmosphere
of Venus is perpetually covered with cloud, so that the weather there
must be always foggy. No definite geographical configuration can be
discovered on her, despite the hopes of the eighteenth-century
astronomers. We are not even sure that she rotates upon herself, so
contradictory are the observations, and so hard is it to distinguish
anything clearly upon her surface. A single night of observation
suffices to show the rotation of Mars or of Jupiter; but the beautiful
Evening Star remains obstinately veiled from our curiosity.

Several astronomers, and not the least considerable, think that the
tides produced by the Sun upon her seas, or globe in its state of
pristine fluidity, must have been strong enough to seize and fix her, as
the Earth did for the Moon, thus obliging her to present always the same
face to the Sun. Certain telescopic observations would even seem to
confirm this theoretical deduction from the calculations of celestial
mechanics.

The author ventures to disagree with this opinion, its apparent
probability notwithstanding, because he has invariably received a
contrary impression from all his telescopic observations. He has quite
recently (spring of 1903) repeated these observations. Choosing a
remarkably clear and perfectly calm atmosphere, he examined the splendid
planet several times with great attention in the field of the telescope.
The right or eastern border (reversed image) was dulled by the
atmosphere of Venus; this is the line of separation between day and
night. Beneath, at the extreme northern edge, he was attracted on each
occasion by a small white patch, a little whiter than the rest of the
surface of the planet, surrounded by a light-gray penumbra, giving the
exact effect of a polar snow, very analogous to that observed at the
poles of Mars. To the author this white spot on the boreal horn of
Venus does not appear to be due to an effect of contrast, as has
sometimes been supposed.

Now, if the globe of Venus has poles, it must turn upon itself.

Unfortunately it has proved impossible to distinguish any sign upon the
disk, indicative of the direction and speed of its rotary movement,
although these observations were made, with others, under excellent
conditions.--Three o'clock in the afternoon, brilliant sun, sky clear
blue, the planet but little removed from the meridian--at which time it
is less dazzling than in the evening.

There is merely the impression; but it is so definite as to prevent the
author from adopting the new hypothesis, in virtue of which the planet,
as it gravitates round the Sun, presents always the same hemisphere.

If this hypothesis were a reality, Venus would certainly be a very
peculiar world. Eternal day on the one side; eternal night on the other.
Maximum light and heat at the center of the hemisphere perpetually
turned to the Sun; maximum cold and center of night at the antipodes.
This icy hemisphere would possibly be uninhabitable, but the resources
of Nature are so prodigious, and the law of Life is so imperious, so
persistent, under the most disadvantageous and deplorable terrestrial
conditions, that it would be transcending our rights to declare an
impossibility of existence, even in this eternal night. The currents of
the atmosphere would no doubt suffice to set up perpetual changes of
temperature between the two hemispheres, in comparison with which our
trade-winds would be the lightest of breezes.

Yes, mystery still reigns upon this adjacent earth, and the most
powerful instruments of the observatories of the whole world have been
unable to solve it. All we know is that the diameter, surface, volume
and mass of this planet, and its weight at the surface, do not differ
sensibly from those that characterize our own globe: that this planet is
sister to our own, and of the same order, hence probably formed of the
same elements. We further know that, as seen from Venus (Fig. 39), the
Earth on which we live is a magnificent star, a double orb more
brilliant even than when viewed from Mercury. It is a dazzling orb of
first magnitude, accompanied by its moon, a star of the second and a
half magnitude.

And thus the worlds float on in space, distant symbols of hopes not
realized on any one of them, all at different stages of their degree of
evolution, representing an ever-growing progress in the sequence of the
ages.

[Illustration: FIG. 39.--The Earth viewed from Venus.]

When we contemplate this radiant Venus, it is difficult, even if we can
not form any definite idea as to her actual state as regards habitation,
to assume that she must be a dreary desert, and not, on the contrary,
to hail in her a celestial land, differing more or less from our own
dwelling-place, travailing with her sisters in the accomplishment of the
general plan of Nature.

Such are the characteristic features of our celestial neighbor. In
quitting her, we reach the Earth, which comes immediately next her in
order of distance, 149 million kilometers (93000000 miles) from the
Sun, but as we shall devote an entire chapter to our own planet, we will
not halt at this point, but cross in one step the distance that
separates Mars from Venus.

Let us only remark in passing, that our planet is the largest of the
four spheres adjacent to the Sun. Here are their comparative diameters:

                         The Earth = 1.    In Kilometers.    In Miles.
          Mercury             0.373             4,750           2,946
          Venus               0.999            12,730           7,894
          Earth               1.000            12,742           7,926
          Mars                0.528             6,728           4,172

It will be seen that Venus is almost identical with the Earth.


MARS

Two hundred and twenty-six millions of kilometers (140000000 miles)
from the Sun is the planet Mars, gravitating in an orbit exterior to
that which the Earth takes annually round the same center.

Unfortunate Mars! What evil fairy presided at his birth? From
antiquity, all curses seem to have fallen upon him. He is the god of war
and of carnage, the protector of armies, the inspirer of hatred among
the peoples, it is he who pours out the blood of Humanity in
international hecatombs. Here, again, as in the case of Mercury and
Venus, the appearance has originated the idea. Mars, in fact, burns like
a drop of blood in the depths of the firmament, and it is this ruddy
color that inspired its name and attributes, just as the dazzling
whiteness of Venus made her the goddess of love and beauty. Why, indeed,
should the origins of mythology be sought elsewhere than in astronomy?

While Humanity was attributing to the presumptive influence of Mars the
defects inherent in its own terrestrial nature, this world, unwitting of
our sorrows, pursued the celestial path marked out for it in space by
destiny.

This planet is, as we have said, the first encountered after the Earth.
Its orbit is very elongated, very eccentric. Mars accomplishes it in a
period of 1 year, 321 days, 22 hours, _i.e._, 1 year, 10 months, 21
days, or 687 days. The velocity of its transit is 23 kilometers (14.5
miles) per second; that of the Earth is 30 (19 miles). Our planet,
traveling through space at an average distance of 149 million kilometers
(93000000 miles) from the central focus, is separated from Mars by an
average distance of 76 million kilometers (47000000 miles); but as its
orbit is equally elliptic and elongated it follows that at certain
epochs the two planets approach one another by something less than 60
million kilometers (37000000 miles). These are the periods selected
for making the best observations upon our neighbor of the ruddy rays.
The oppositions of Mars arrive about every twenty-six months, but the
periods of its greatest proximity, when this planet approaches to within
56 million kilometers (34,700000 miles) of the Earth, occur only every
fifteen years.

Mars is then passing perihelion, while our world is at aphelion (or
greatest distance from the Sun). At such epochs this globe presents to
us an apparent diameter 63 times smaller than that of the Moon, _i.e._,
a telescope that magnifies 63 times would show him to us of the same
magnitude as our satellite viewed with the unaided eye, and an
instrument that magnified 630 times would show him ten times larger in
diameter.

In dimensions he differs considerably from our world, being almost half
the size of the Earth. In diameter he measures only 6,728 kilometers
(4,172 miles), and his circumference is 21,125 kilometers (13000
miles). His surface is only 29/100 of the terrestrial surface, and his
volume only 15/100 of our own.

This difference in volume causes Mars to be an earth in miniature. When
we study his aspects, his geography, his meteorology, we seem to see in
space a reduction of our own abode, with certain dissimilarities that
excite our curiosity, and make him even more interesting to us.

The Martian world weighs nine times and a half less than our own. If we
represent the weight of the Earth by 1000, that of Mars would be
represented by 105. His density is much less than our own; it is only
7/10 that of the Earth. A man weighing 70 kilograms, transported to the
adjacent globe, would weigh only 26 kilograms.

The earliest telescopic observations revealed the existence of more or
less accentuated markings upon the surface of Mars. The progress of
optics, admitting of greater magnifications, exhibited the form of these
patches more clearly, while the study of their motions enabled the
astronomers to determine with remarkable precision the diurnal rotation
of this planet. It occurs in 24 hours, 37 minutes, 23.65 seconds. Day
and night are accordingly a little longer on Mars than on the Earth, but
the difference is obviously inconsiderable. The year of Mars consists of
668 Martian days. The inclination of the axis of rotation of this globe
upon the plane of its orbit is much the same as our own. In
consequence, its seasons are analogous to ours in intensity, while twice
the length, the Martian year being almost equal to two of our years. The
intensity of the seasons is indeed more accentuated than upon the Earth,
since the orbit of Mars is very elongated. But there, as here, are three
quite distinct zones: the torrid, the temperate, and the glacial.

By means of the telescope we can follow the variations of the Martian
seasons, especially in what concerns the polar snows, which regularly
aggregate during the winter, and melt no less regularly during the heat
of the summer. These snows are very easily observed, and stand out
clearly with dazzling whiteness. The reader can judge of them by the
accompanying figure, which sums up the author's observations during one
of the recent oppositions of Mars (1900-1901). The size of the polar cap
diminished from 4,680 kilometers to 840. The solstice of the Martian
summer was on April 11th. The snows were still melting on July 6th.
Sometimes they disappear almost entirely during the Martian month that
corresponds to our month of August, as never happens with our polar ice.
Hence, though this planet is farther away from the Sun than ourselves,
it does not appear to be colder, or, at any rate, it is certain that the
polar snows are much less thick.

On the other hand, there are hardly ever clouds on Mars; the Martian
atmosphere is almost always limpid, and one can say that fine weather is
the chronic state of the planet. At times, light fogs or a little vapor
will appear in certain regions, but they are soon dissipated, and the
sky clears up again.

[Illustration: FIG. 40.--Diminution of the polar snows of Mars during
the summer.]

Since the invention of the telescope, a considerable number of drawings
have been made, depicting Mars under every aspect, and the agreement
between these numerous observations gives us a sufficient acquaintance
with the planet to admit of our indicating the characteristic features
of its geography, and of drawing out _areographic_ maps (_Ares_, Mars).
Its appearance can be judged of from the two drawings here reproduced,
as made (February, 1901) at the Observatory of Juvisy, and from the
general chart drawn from the total sum of observations (Figs. 41, 42 and
43).

It will be seen at the first glance that the geography of Mars is very
different from that of our own globe: while three-quarters of the Earth
are covered with the liquid element, Mars seems to be more evenly
divided, and must indeed have rather more land than water. We find no
immense oceans surrounding the continents, and separating them like
islands; on the contrary, the seas are reduced to long gulfs compressed
between the shores, like the Mediterranean for example, nor is it even
certain that these gray spots do all represent true seas. It has been
agreed to term _sea_ the parts that are lightly tinged with green, and
to give the name of _continent_ to the spots colored yellow. That is the
hue of the Martian soil, due either to the soil itself, which would
resemble that of the Sahara, or, to take a less arid region, that seen
on the line between Marseilles and Nice, in the vicinity of the
Esterels; or perhaps to some peculiar vegetation. During ascents in a
balloon, the author has often remarked that the hue of the ripe corn,
with the Sun shining on it, is precisely that presented to us by the
continents of Mars in the best hours for observation.

[Illustration: FIG. 41.--Telescopic aspect of the planet Mars (Feb.,
1901).]

As to the "seas," it is pretty certain that there must be water, or
some kind of liquid, deriving above all from the melting of the polar
snows in spring and summer; but it may possibly be in conjunction with
some vegetation, aquatic plants, or perhaps vast meadows, which appear
to us from here to be the more considerable in proportion as the water
that nourishes them has been more abundant.

[Illustration: FIG. 42.--Telescopic aspect of the planet Mars (Feb.,
1901).]

Mars, like our globe, is surrounded with a protective atmosphere, which
retains the rays of the Sun, and must preserve a medium temperature
favorable to the conservation of life upon the surface of the planet.
But the circulation of the water, so important to terrestrial life,
whether animal or vegetable, which is effected upon our planet by the
evaporation of the seas, clouds, winds, rains, wells, rivers and
streams, comes about quite differently on Mars; for, as was remarked
above, it is rarely that any clouds are observed there. Instead of being
vertical, as here, this circulation is horizontal: the water coming from
the source of the polar snows finds its way into the canals and seas,
and returns to be condensed at the poles by a light drift of invisible
vapors directed from the equator to the poles. There is never any rain.

We have spoken of _canals_. One of the great puzzles of the Martian
world is incontestably the appearance of straight lines that furrow its
surface in all directions, and seem to connect the seas. M.
Schiaparelli, the distinguished Director of the Observatory of Milan,
who discovered them in 1877, called them canals, without, however,
postulating anything as to their real nature. Are they indeed canals?
These straight lines, measuring sometimes 600 kilometers (372 miles) in
length, and more than 100 kilometers (62 miles) in breadth, have much
the same hue as the seas on which they open. For a quarter of a century
they have been surveyed by the greater number of our observers. But it
must be confessed that, even with the best instruments, we only approach
Mars at a distance of 60000 kilometers (37,200 miles), which is still a
little far off, and we may be sure that we do not distinguish the true
details of the surface.[11] These details at the limits of visibility
produce the appearance of canals to our eyes. They may possibly be lines
of lakes, or oases. The future will no doubt clear up this mystery for
us.

[Illustration: FIG. 43.--Chart of Mars.]

As to the inhabitants of Mars, this world is in a situation as
favorable as our Earth for habitation, and it would be difficult to
discover any reason for perpetual sterility there. It appears to us, on
the contrary, by its rapid and frequent variations of aspect, to be a
very living world. Its atmosphere, which is always clear, has not the
density of our own, and resembles that of the highest mountains. The
conditions of existence there vary from ours, and appear to be more
delicate, more ethereal.

There as here, day succeeds to night, spring softens the rigors of
winter; the seasons unfold, less disparate than our own, of which we
have such frequent reason to complain. The sky is perpetually clear.
There are never tempests, hurricanes, nor cyclones, the wind never gets
up any force there, on account of the rarity of the atmosphere, and the
low intensity of weight.

Differing from ours, this world may well be a more congenial
habitation. It is more ancient than the Earth, smaller, less massive. It
has run more quickly through the phases of its evolution. Its astral
life is more advanced, and its Humanity should be superior to our own,
just as our successors a million years hence, for example, will be less
coarse and barbarous than we are at present: the law of progress governs
all the worlds, and, moreover, the physical constitution of the planet
Mars is less dense than our own.

There is no need to despair of entering some day into communication with
these unknown beings. The luminous points that have been observed are no
signals, but high summits or light clouds illuminated by the rising or
setting sun. But the idea of communication with them in the future is no
more audacious and no less scientific than the invention of spectral
analysis, X-rays, or wireless telegraphy.

We may suppose that the study of astronomy is further advanced in Mars
than on the Earth, because humanity itself has advanced further, and
because the starry sky is far finer there, far easier to study, owing to
the limpidity of its pure, clear atmosphere.

Two small moons (hardly larger than the city of Paris) revolve rapidly
round Mars; they are called Phobos and Deimos. The former, at a distance
of 6000 kilometers (3,730 miles) from the surface, accomplishes its
revolution rapidly, in seven hours, thirty-nine minutes, and thus makes
the entire circle of the Heavens three times a day. The second
gravitates at 20000 kilometers (12,400 miles), and turns round its
center of attraction in thirty hours and eighteen minutes. These two
satellites were discovered by Mr. Hall, at the University of Washington,
in the month of August, 1877.

       *       *       *       *       *

Among the finest and most interesting of the celestial phenomena admired
by the Martians, at certain epochs of the year,--now at night when the
Sun has plunged into his fiery bed, now in the morning, a little before
the aurora,--is a magnificent star of first magnitude, never far removed
from the orb of day, which presents to them the same aspects as does
Venus to ourselves. This splendid orb, which has doubtless received the
most flattering names from those who contemplate it, this radiant star
of a beautiful greenish blue, courses in space accompanied by a little
satellite, sparkling like some splendid diamond, after sunset, in the
clear sky of Mars. This superb orb is the Earth, and the little star
accompanying it is the Moon.

[Illustration: FIG. 44.--The Earth viewed from Mars.]

Yes, to the Martians our Earth is a star of the morning and evening;
doubtless they have determined her phases. Many a vow, and many a hope
must have been wafted toward her, more than one broken heart must have
permitted its unrealized dreams to wander forth to our planet as to an
abode of happiness where all who have suffered in their native world
might find a haven. But our planet, alas! is not as perfect as they
imagine.

We must not dally upon Mars, but hasten our celestial excursion toward
Jupiter.




CHAPTER VI

THE PLANETS

_B._--JUPITER, SATURN, URANUS, NEPTUNE.


Before we attack the giant world of our system, we must halt for a few
moments upon the minor planets which circulate between the orbit of Mars
and that of Jupiter. These minute asters, little worlds, the largest of
which measures scarcely more than 100 kilometers (62 miles) in diameter,
are fragments of cosmic matter that once belonged to a vast ring, formed
at the time when the solar system was only an immense nebula; and which,
instead of condensing into a single globe coursing between Mars and
Jupiter, split up into a considerable quantity of particles constituting
at the present time the curious and highly interesting Republic of the
Asteroids.

These lilliputian worlds at first received the names of the more
celebrated of the minor mythological divinities--Ceres, Pallas, Juno,
Vesta, etc., but as they rapidly increased in number, it was found
necessary to call them by modern, terrestrial names, and more than one
daughter of Eve, the Egeria of some astronomer, now has her name
inscribed in the Heavens. The first minor planet was discovered on the
first day of the nineteenth century, January 1, 1801, by Piazzi,
astronomer at Palermo. While he was observing the small stars in the
constellation of the Bull beneath the clear Sicilian skies, this famous
astronomer noticed one that he had never seen before.

The next night, directing his telescope to the same part of the Heavens,
he perceived that the fair unknown had moved her station, and the
observations of the following days left him no doubt as to the nature of
the visitor: she was a planet, a wandering star among the
constellations, revolving round the Sun. This newcomer was registered
under the name of Ceres.

Since that epoch several hundreds of them have been discovered,
occupying a zone that extends over a space of more than 400 million
kilometers (249000000 miles). These celestial globules are invisible
to the naked eye, but no year passes without new and numerous recruits
being added to the already important catalogue of these minute asters by
the patient observers of the Heavens. To-day, they are most frequently
discovered by the photographic method of following the displacement of
the tiny moving points upon an exposed sensitive plate.


JUPITER

And now let us bow respectfully before Jupiter, the giant of the worlds.
This glorious planet is indeed King of the Solar System.

While Mercury measures only 4,750 kilometers (2,946 miles) in diameter,
and Mars 6,728 kilometers (4,172), Jupiter is no less than 140,920
kilometers (87,400 miles) in breadth; that is to say, eleven times
larger than the Earth. He is 442,500 kilometers (274,357 miles) in
circumference.

In volume he is equivalent to 1,279 terrestrial globes; hence he is only
a million times smaller than the Sun. The previously described planets
of our system, Mercury, Venus, the Earth, and Mars combined, would form
only an insignificant mass in comparison with this colossus. A hundred
and twenty-six Earths joined into one group would present a surface
whose extent would still not be quite as vast as the superficies of this
titanic world. This immense globe weighs 310 times more than that which
we inhabit. Its density is only the quarter of our own; but weight is
twice and a half times as great there as here. The constituents of
things and beings are thus composed of materials lighter than those upon
the Earth; but, as the planet exerts a force of attraction twice and a
half times as powerful, they are in reality heavier and weigh more. A
graceful maiden weighing fifty kilograms would if transported to Jupiter
immediately be included in the imposing society of the "Hundred Kilos."

Jupiter rotates upon himself with prodigious rapidity. He accomplishes
his diurnal revolution in less than ten hours! There the day lasts half
as long as here, and while we reckoned fifteen days upon our calendar,
the Jovian would count thirty-six. As Jupiter's year equals nearly
twelve of ours, the almanac of that planet would contain 10,455 days!
Obviously, our pretty little pocket calendars would never serve to
enumerate all the dates in this vast world.

This splendid globe courses in space at a distance of 775000000
kilometers (480,500000 miles) from the Sun. Hence it is five times
(5.2) as remote from the orb of day as our Earth, and its orbit is five
times vaster than our own. At that distance the Sun subtends a diameter
five times smaller than that which we see, and its surface is
twenty-seven times less extensive; accordingly this planetary abode
receives on an average twenty-seven times less light and heat than we
obtain.

In the telescope Jupiter presents an aspect analogous to that likely to
be exhibited by a world covered with clouds, and enveloped in dense
vapors (Fig. 45).

It is, in fact, the seat of formidable perturbations, of strange
revolutions by which it is perpetually convulsed, for although of more
ancient formation than the Earth, this celestial giant has not yet
arrived at the stable condition of our dwelling-place. Owing to its
considerable volume, this globe has probably preserved its original
heat, revolving in space as an obscure Sun, but perhaps still burning.
In it we see what our own planet must have been in its primordial epoch,
in the pristine times of terrestrial genesis.

[Illustration: FIG. 45.--Telescopic aspect of Jupiter.]

Since its orbital revolution occupies nearly twelve years, Jupiter
comes back into opposition with the Sun every 399 days, _i.e._, 1 year,
34 days, that is with one month and four days' delay each year. At these
periods it is located at the extremity of a straight line which, passing
by the Earth, is prolonged to the Sun. These are the epochs to be
selected for observation. It shines then, all night, like some dazzling
star of the first magnitude, of excessive whiteness: nor can it be
confounded either with Venus, more luminous still (for she is never
visible at midnight, in the full South, but is South-west in the
evening, or South-east in the morning), nor with Mars, whose fires are
ruddy.

In the telescope, the immense planet presents a superb disk that an
enlargement of forty times shows us to be the same size to all
appearance as that of the Moon seen with the unaided eye. Its shape is
not absolutely spherical, but spheroid--that is, flattened at the poles.
The flattening is 1/17.

We know that the Earth's axis dips a certain quantity on the plane of
her orbit, and that it is this inclination that produces the seasons.
Now it is not the same for Jupiter. His axis of rotation remains almost
vertical throughout the course of his year, and results in the complete
absence of climates and seasons. There is neither glacial zone, nor
tropic zone; the position of Jupiter is eternally that of the Earth at
the season of the equinox, and the vast world enjoys, as it were,
perpetual spring. It knows neither the hoar-frost nor the snows of
winter. The heat received from the Sun diminishes gradually from the
equator to the poles without abrupt transitions, and the duration of day
and night is equal there throughout the entire year, under every
latitude. A privileged world, indeed!

It is surrounded by a very dense, thick atmosphere, which undergoes more
extensive variations than could be produced by the Sun at such a
distance. Spectral analysis detects a large amount of water-vapor,
showing that this planet still possesses a very considerable quantity of
intrinsic heat.

Most conspicuous upon this globe are the larger or smaller bands or
markings (gray and white, sometimes tinted yellow, or of a maroon or
chocolate hue) by which its surface is streaked, particularly in the
vicinity of the equator. These different belts vary, and are constantly
modified, either in form or color. Sometimes, they are irregular, and
cut up; at others they are interspersed with more or less brilliant
patches. These patches are not affixed to the surface of the globe, like
the seas and continents of the Earth; nor do they circulate round the
planet like the satellites, in more or less elongated and regular
revolutions, but are relatively mobile, like our clouds in the
atmosphere, while observation of their motion does not give the exact
period of the rotation of Jupiter. Some only appear upon the agitated
disk to vanish very quickly; others subsist for a considerable period.

One has been observed for over a quarter of a century, and appears to be
almost immobile upon this colossal globe. This spot, which was red at
its first appearance, is now pale and ghostly. It is oval (_vide_ Fig.
45) and measures 42000 kilometers (26,040 miles) in length by 15000
kilometers (9,300 miles) in width. Hence it is about four times as long
as the diameter of our Earth; that is, relatively to the size of
Jupiter, as are the dimensions of Australia in proportion to our globe.
The discussion of a larger number of observations leads us to see in it
a sort of continent in the making, a scoria recently ejected from the
mobile and still liquid and heated surface of the giant Jupiter. The
patch, however, oscillates perceptibly, and appears to be a floating
island.

We must add that this vast world, like the Sun, _does not rotate all in
one period_. Eight different currents can be perceived upon its surface.
The most rapid is that of the equatorial zone, which accomplishes its
revolution in 9 hours, 50 minutes, 29 seconds. A point situated on the
equator is therefore carried forward at a speed of 12,500 meters (7
miles) per second, and it is this giddy velocity of Jupiter that has
produced the flattening of the poles. From the equator to the poles, the
swiftness of the currents diminishes irregularly, and the difference
amounts to about five minutes between the movement of the equatorial
stream, and that of the northern and southern currents. But what is more
curious still is that the velocity of one and the same stream is subject
to certain fluctuations; thus, in the last quarter of a century, the
speed of the equatorial current has progressively diminished. In 1879,
the velocity was 9 hours, 49 minutes, 59 seconds, and now it is, as we
have already seen, 9 hours, 50 minutes, 29 seconds, which represents a
substantial reduction. The rotation of the red patch, at 25 degrees of
the southern latitude, is effected in 9 hours, 55 minutes, 40 seconds.

We are confronted with a strange and mysterious world. It is the world
of the future.

This giant gravitates in space accompanied by a suite of five
satellites. These are:

       Names.   Distance from surface of Jupiter.    Time of revolution.
                     Kilometers.     Miles.            Days.   Hours.
  5.                  200000       124000                      11
  1. Io               430000       266000              1       18
  2. Europa           682000       422,840              3       13
  3. Ganymede       1,088000       674,560              7        4
  4. Callisto       1,914000     1,186,680             16       16

The four principal satellites of Jupiter were discovered at the same
time, on the same evenings (January 7 and 8, 1610), by the two
astronomers who were pointing their telescopes at Jupiter: Galileo in
Italy, and Simon Marius in Germany.

On September 9, 1892, Mr. Barnard, astronomer of the Lick Observatory,
California, discovered a new satellite, extremely minute, and very near
the enormous planet. It has so far received no name, and is known as the
fifth, although the four principal are numbered in the order of their
distances.

[Illustration: FIG. 46.--Jupiter and his four principal satellites.]

The four classical satellites are visible in the smallest instruments
(Fig. 46): the third is the most voluminous.

Such is the splendid system of the mighty Jupiter. Once, doubtless, this
fine planet illuminated the troop of worlds that derived their treasure
of vitality from him with his intrinsic light: to-day, however, these
moons in their turn shed upon the extinct central globe the pale soft
light which they receive from our solar focus, illuminating the brief
Jovian nights (which last less than five hours, on account of the
twilight) with their variable brilliancy.

At the distance of the first satellite, Jupiter exhibits a disk
_fourteen hundred times_ vaster than that of the Full Moon! What a
dazzling spectacle, what a fairy scene must the enormous star afford to
the inhabitants of that tiny world! And what a shabby figure must our
Earth and Moon present in the face of such a body, a real miniature of
the great solar system!

Our ancestors were well inspired when they attributed the sovereignty of
Olympus to this majestic planet. His brilliancy corresponds with his
real grandeur. His dominion in the midnight Heavens is unique. Here
again, as for Venus, Mars, and Mercury, astronomy has created the legend
of the fables of mythology.

Let us repeat in conclusion that our Earth becomes practically invisible
for the inhabitants of the other worlds beyond the distance of Jupiter.


SATURN

Turn back now for a moment to the plan of the Solar System.

We had to cross 775 million kilometers (480000000 miles) when we left
the Sun, in order to reach the immense orb of Jupiter, which courses in
space at 626 million kilometers (388000000 miles) from the terrestrial
orbit. From Jupiter we had to traverse a distance of 646 million
kilometers (400000000 miles) in order to reach the marvelous system of
Saturn, where our eyes and thoughts must next alight.

Son of Uranus and Vesta, Saturn was the God of Time and Fate. He is
generally represented as an aged man bearing a scythe. His mythological
character is only the expression of his celestial aspect, as we have
seen for the brilliant Jupiter, for the pale Venus, the ruddy Mars, and
the agile Mercury. The revolution of Saturn is the slowest of any among
the planets known to the ancients. It takes almost thirty years for its
accomplishment, and at that distance the Saturnian world, though it
still shines with the brilliancy of a star of the first magnitude,
exhibits to our eyes a pale and leaden hue. Here is, indeed, the god of
Time, with slow and almost funereal gait.

Poor Saturn won no favor with the poets and astrologers. He bore the
horrid reputation of being the inexhaustible source of misfortune and
evil fates,--whereof he is wholly innocent, troubling himself not at all
with our world nor its inhabitants.

This world travels in the vastness of the Heavens at a distance of 1,421
million kilometers (881000000 miles) from the Sun. Hence it is ten
times farther from the orb of day than the Earth, though still
illuminated and governed by the Sun-God. Its gigantic orbit is ten times
larger than our own.

Its revolution round the Sun is accomplished in 10,759 days, _i.e._, 29
years, 167 days, and as this strange planet rotates upon itself with
great rapidity in 10 hours, 15 minutes, its year comprises no less than
25,217 days. What a calendar! The Saturnians must needs have a
prodigious memory not to get hopelessly involved in this interminable
number of days. A curious world, where each year stands for almost
thirty of our own, and where the day is more than half as short again as
ours. But we shall presently find other and more extraordinary
differences on this planet.

In the first place it is nearly nine and a half times larger than our
world. It is a globe, not spherical, but spheroidal, and the flattening
of its poles, which is one-tenth, exceeds that of all the other planets,
even Jupiter. It follows that its equatorial diameter is 112,500
kilometers (69,750 miles), while its polar diameter measures only
110000 kilometers (68,200).

In volume, Saturn is 719 times larger than the Earth, but its density is
only 128/1000 of our own; _i.e._, the materials of which it is composed
are much less heavy, so that it weighs only 92 times more than our
Earth. Its surface is 85 times vaster than that of the Earth, no
insignificant proportion.

[Illustration: FIG. 47.--Saturn.]

The dipping of Saturn's axis of rotation is much the same as our own.
Hence we conclude that the seasons of this planet are analogous to ours
in relative intensity. Only upon this far-off world each season lasts
for seven years. At the distance at which it gravitates in space, the
heat and light which it receives from the Sun are 90 times less active
than such as reach our selves; but it apparently possesses an atmosphere
of great density, which may be constituted so that the heat is
preserved, and the planet maintained in a calorific condition but little
inferior to our own.

In the telescope, the disk of Saturn exhibits large belts that recall
those of Jupiter, though they are broader and less accentuated (Fig.
47). There are doubtless zones of clouds or rapid currents circulating
in the atmosphere. Spots are also visible whose displacement assists in
calculating the diurnal motions of this globe.

The most extraordinary characteristic of this strange world is, however,
the existence of a vast _ring_, which is almost flat and very large, and
entirely envelops the body of the planet. It is suspended in the
Saturnian sky, like a gigantic triumphal arch, at a height of some
20000 kilometers (12,400 miles) above the equator. This splendid arch
is circular, like an immense crown illuminated by the Sun. From here we
only see it obliquely, and it appears to us elliptical; a part of the
ring seems to pass in front of Saturn, and its shadow is visible on the
planet, while the opposite part passes behind.

This ring, which measures 284000 kilometers (176,080 miles) in
diameter, and less than 100 kilometers (62 miles) in breadth, is divided
into three distinct zones: the exterior is less luminous than the
center, which is always brighter than the planet itself; the interior is
very dark, and spreads out like a dusky and faintly transparent veil,
through which Saturn can be distinguished.

What is the nature of these vast concentric circles that surround the
planet with a luminous halo? They are composed of an innumerable number
of particles, of a quantity of cosmic fragments, which are swept off in
a rapid revolution, and gravitate round the planet at variable speed and
distance. The nearer particles must accomplish their revolution in 5
hours, 50 minutes, and the most distant in about 12 hours, 5 minutes, to
prevent them from being merged in the surface of Saturn: their own
centrifugal force sustains them in space.

[Illustration: FIG. 48. Varying perspective of Saturn's Rings, as seen
from the Earth.]

With a good glass the effect of these rings is most striking, and one
can not refrain from emotion on contemplating this marvel, whereby one
of the brothers of our terrestrial country is crowned with a golden
diadem. Its aspects vary with its perspective relative to the Earth, as
may be seen from the subjoined figure (Fig. 48).

We must not quit the Saturnian province without mentioning the eight
satellites that form his splendid suite:

  Names.        Distance from the planet.      Time of revolution.
                Kilometers.       Miles.      Days.   Hours.    Minutes.
  1. Mimas         207000       128,340                22         37
  2. Enceladus     257,600       159,712        1        8         53
  3. Tethys        328,800       203,856        1       21         18
  4. Dione         421,200       261,144        2       17         41
  5. Rhea          588,400       364,808        4       12         25
  6. Titan       1,364000       845,680       15       22         41
  7. Hyperion    1,650000     1,023000       21        6         39
  8. Japhet      3,964000     2,457,680       79        7         54

Here is a marvelous system, with, what is more, eight different kinds of
months for the inhabitants of Saturn; eight moons with constantly
varying phases juggling above the rings!

Now we shall cross at a bound the 1,400 million kilometers (868000000
miles) that separate us from the last station but one of the immense
solar system.


URANUS

On March 13, 1781, William Herschel, a Hanoverian astronomer who had
emigrated to England, having abandoned the study of music to devote
himself to the sublime science of the Heavens, was observing the vast
fields with their constellations of golden stars, when he perceived a
luminous point that appeared to him to exceed that of the other
celestial luminaries in diameter. He replaced the magnification of his
telescope by more powerful eye-pieces, and found that the apparent
diameter of the orb increased proportionately with the amplification of
the power, which does not happen in the case of stars at infinite
distance. His observations on the following evenings enabled him to note
the slow and imperceptible movement of this star upon the celestial
sphere, and left him in no further doubt: there was no star, but some
much nearer orb, in all probability a comet, for the great astronomer
dared not predict the discovery of a new planet. And it was thus, under
the name of cometary orb, that the seventh child of the Sun was
announced. The astronomers sought to determine the motions of the new
arrival, to discover for it an elliptical orbit such as most comets
have. But their efforts were vain, and after several months' study the
conclusion was reached that here was a new planet, throwing back the
limits of the solar system to a point far beyond that of the Saturnian
frontier, as admitted from antiquity.

This new world received the name of Uranus, father of Saturn, his
nearest neighbor in the solar empire. Uranus shines in the firmament as
a small star of sixth magnitude, invisible to the unaided eye for
normal sight, at a distance of 2,831000000 kilometers (1,755000000
miles) from the Sun. Smaller than Jupiter and Saturn, this planet is yet
larger than Mercury, Venus, Mars, and the Earth together, thus
presenting proportions that claim our respect and admiration.

His diameter may be taken at about 55000 kilometers (34,200 miles),
that is, rather more than four times the breadth of the terrestrial
diameter. Sixty-nine times more voluminous than the Earth, and seventeen
times more extensive in surface, this new world is much less than our
own in density. The matter of which it is composed is nearly five times
lighter than that of our globe.

Spectral analysis shows that this distant planet is surrounded with an
atmosphere very different from that which we breathe, enclosing gases
that do not exist in ours.

The Uranian globe courses over the fields of infinity in a vast orbit
seventeen times larger than our own, and its revolution lasts 36,688
days, _i.e._, 84 years, 8 days. It travels slowly and sadly under the
pale and languishing rays of the Sun, which sends it nearly three
hundred times less of light and heat than we receive. At this distance
the solar disk would present a diameter seventeen times smaller than
that which we admire, and a surface three hundred times less vast. A
dull world indeed! And what an interminable year! The idle people who
are in the habit of being bored must find time even longer upon Uranus
than upon our little Earth, where the days pass so rapidly. And if
matters are arranged there as here, a babe of a year old, beginning to
babble in its nurse's arms, would already have lived as long as an old
man of eighty-four in this world.

But what most seriously complicates the Calendar of the Uranians is the
fact that the four moons which accompany the planet accomplish their
revolution in four different kinds of months, in two, four, eight, and
thirteen days, as is shown in the following table:

                Distance from the planet.      Time of revolution.
                 Kilometers.      Miles.      Days. Hours. Minutes.

  1. Ariel         196000       121,520        2     12     29
  2. Umbriel       276000       171,120        4      3     27
  3. Titania       450000       279000        8     16     56
  4. Oberon        600000       372000       13     11      7

The most curious fact is that these satellites do not rotate like those
of the other planets. While the moons of the Earth, Mars, Jupiter, and
Saturn accomplish their revolution from east to west, the satellites of
Uranus rotate in a plane almost perpendicular to the ecliptic, and it is
doubtless the same for the rotation of the planet.

If we had to quit the Earth, and fixate ourselves upon another world,
we should prefer Mars to Uranus, where everything must be so different
from terrestrial arrangements? But who knows? Perhaps, after all, this
planet might afford us some agreeable surprises. _Il ne faut jurer de
rien._


NEPTUNE

And here we reach the frontier of the Solar System, as actually known to
us. In landing on the world of Neptune, which circles through the
Heavens in eternal twilight at a distance of more than four milliard
kilometers (2,480000000 miles) from the common center of attraction of
the planetary orbs, we once again admire the prodigies of science.

Uranus was discovered with the telescope, Neptune by calculation. In
addition to the solar influence, the worlds exert a mutual attraction
upon each other that slightly deranges the harmony ordered by the Sun.
The stronger act upon the weaker, and the colossal Jupiter alone causes
many of the perturbations in our great solar family. Now during regular
observations of the position of Uranus in space, some inexplicable
irregularities were soon perceived. The astronomers having full faith in
the universality of the law of attraction, could not do otherwise than
attribute these irregularities to the influence of some unknown planet
situated even farther off. But at what distance?

A very simple proportion, known as Bode's law, has been observed, which
indicates approximately the relative distances of the planets from the
Sun. It is as follows: Starting from 0, write the number 3, and double
successively,

          0  3  6  12  24  48  96  192  384.

Then, add the number 4 to each of the preceding figures, which gives the
following series:

          4  7  10  16  28  52  100  196  388.

Now it is a very curious fact that if the distance between the Earth and
the Sun be represented by 10, the figure 4 represents the orbit of
Mercury, 7 that of Venus, 16 of Mars; the figure 28 stands for the
medium distance of the minor planets; the distances of Jupiter, Saturn,
and Uranus agree with 52, 100, and 196.

The immortal French mathematician Le Verrier, who pursued the solution
of the Uranian problem, supposed naturally that the disturbing planet
must be at the distance of 388, and made his calculations accordingly.
Its direction in the Heavens was indicated by the form of the
disturbances; the orbit of Uranus bulging, as it were, on the side of
the disturbing factor.

On August 31, 1846, Le Verrier announced the position of the
ultra-Uranian planet, and on September 23d following, a German
astronomer, Galle, at the Observatory of Berlin, who had just received
this intelligence, pointed his telescope toward the quarter of the
Heavens designated, and, in fact, attested the presence of the new orb.
Without quitting his study table, Le Verrier, by the sole use of
mathematics, had detected, and, as it were, touched at pen's point the
mysterious stranger.

Only, it is proved by observation and calculation that it is less remote
than was expected from the preceding law, for it gravitates at a
distance of 300, given that from the Earth to the Sun as 10.

This planet was called Neptune, god of the seas, son of Saturn, brother
of Jupiter. The name is well chosen, since the King of the Ocean lives
in darkness in the depths of the sea, and Le Verrier's orb is also
plunged in the semi-obscurity of the depths of the celestial element.
But it was primarily selected to do justice to an English astronomer,
Adams, who had simultaneously made the same calculations as Le Verrier,
and obtained the same results--without publishing them. His work
remained in the records of the Greenwich Observatory.

The English command the seas, and wherever they dip their finger into
the water and find it salt, they feel themselves "at home," and know
that "Neptune's trident is the scepter of the world," hence this
complimentary nomenclature.

Neptune is separated by a distance of four milliards, four hundred
million kilometers from the solar center.

At such a distance, thirty times greater than that which exists between
the Sun and our world, Neptune receives nine hundred times less light
and heat than ourselves; _i.e._, Spitzbergen and the polar regions of
our globe are furnaces compared with what must be the Neptunian
temperature. Absolutely invisible to the unaided eye, this world
presents in the telescope the aspect of a star of the eighth magnitude.
With powerful magnifications it is possible to measure its disk, which
appears to be slightly tinged with blue. Its diameter is four times
larger than our own, and measures about 48000 kilometers (29,900
miles), its surface is sixteen times vaster than that of the Earth, and
to attain its volume we should have to put together fifty-five globes
similar to our own. Weight at its surface must be about the same as
here, but its medium density is only 1/3 that of the Earth.

It gravitates slowly, dragging itself along an orbit thirty times vaster
than that of our globe, and its revolution takes 164 years, 281 days,
_i.e._, 164 years, 9 months. A single year of Neptune thus covers
several generations of terrestrial life. Existence must, indeed, be
strange in that tortoise-footed world!

While in their rotation period, Mercury accomplishes 47 kilometers
(29-3/8 miles) per second, and the Earth 29-1/2 (18-1/8 miles), Neptune
rolls along his immense orbit at a rate of only 5-1/2 kilometers (about
3-1/4 miles) per second.

The vast distance that separates us prevents our distinguishing any
details of his surface, but spectral analysis reveals the presence of an
absorbent atmosphere in which are gases unknown to the air of our
planet, and of which the chemical composition resembles that of the
atmosphere of Uranus.

One satellite has been discovered for Neptune. It has a considerable
inclination, and rotates from east to west.

       *       *       *       *       *

And here we have reached the goal of our interplanetary journey. After
visiting the vast provinces of the solar republic, we feel yet greater
admiration and gratitude toward the luminary that governs, warms, and
illuminates the worlds of his system.

In conclusion, let us again insist that the Earth,--a splendid orb as
viewed from Mercury, Venus, and Mars,--begins to disappear from Jupiter,
where she becomes no more than a tiny spark oscillating from side to
side of the Sun, and occasionally passing in front of him as a small
black dot. From Saturn the visibility of our planet is even more
reduced. As to Uranus and Neptune, we are invisible there, at least to
eyes constructed like our own. We do not possess in the Universe the
importance with which we would endow ourselves.

Neptune up to the present guards the portals of our celestial system; we
will leave him to watch over the distant frontier; but before returning
to the Earth, we must glance at certain eccentric orbs, at the mad,
capricious comets, which imprint their airy flight upon the realms of
space.




CHAPTER VII

THE COMETS

SHOOTING STARS, BOLIDES, URANOLITHS OR METEORIC STONES


What marvels have been reviewed by our dazzled eyes since the outset of
these discussions! We first surveyed the magnificent host of stars that
people the vast firmament of Heaven; next we admired and wondered at
suns very differently constituted from our own; then returning from the
depths of space, crossing at a bound the abyss that separates us from
these mysterious luminaries, the distant torches of our somber night,
terrible suns of infinity, we landed on our own beloved orb, the superb
and brilliant day-star. Thence we visited his celestial family, his
system, in which our Earth is a floating island. But the journey would
be incomplete if we omitted certain more or less vagabond orbs, that
occasionally approach the Sun and Earth, some of which may even collide
with us upon their celestial path. These are in the first place the
comets, then the shooting stars, the fire-balls, and meteorites.

Glittering, swift-footed heralds of Immensity, these comets with golden
wings glide lightly through Space, shedding a momentary illumination by
their presence. Whence come they? Whither are they bound?

What problems they propound to us, when, as in some beautiful display of
pyrotechnics, the arch of Heaven is illuminated with their fantastic
light!

But first of all--what is a Comet?

If instead of living in these days of the telescope, of spectrum
analysis, and of astral photography, we were anterior to Galileo, and to
the liberation of the human spirit by Astronomy, we should reply that
the comet is an object of terror, a dangerous menace that appears to
mortals in the purity of the immaculate Heavens, to announce the most
fatal misfortunes to the inhabitants of our planet. Is a comet visible
in the Heavens? The reigning prince may make his testament and prepare
to die. Another apparition in the firmament bodes war, famine, the
advent of grievous pestilence. The astrologers had an open field, and
their fertile imagination might hazard every possible conjecture, seeing
that misfortunes, great or small, are not altogether rare in this
sublunar world.

How many intellects, and those not the most vulgar, from antiquity to
the middle of the last century cursed the apparition of these hirsute
stars, which brought desolation to the heart of man, and poured their
fatal effluvia upon the head of poor Humanity. The history of the
superstitions and fears that they inspired of old would furnish matter
for the most thrilling of romances. But, on the other hand, the volume
would be little flattering to the common-sense of our ancestors. Despite
the respect we owe our forefathers, let us recall for a moment the
prejudices attaching to the most famous comets whose passage, as
observed from the Earth, has been preserved to us in history.

[Illustration: FIG. 49.--Great Comet of 1858.]

       *       *       *       *       *

Without going back to the Deluge, we note that the Romans established a
relation between the Great Comet of 43 B.C. and the death of Cæsar, who
had been assassinated a few months previously. It was, they asserted,
the soul of their great Captain, transported to Heaven to reign in the
empyrean after ruling here below. Were not the Emperors Lords of both
Earth and Heaven?

We must in justice recognize that certain more independent spirits
emancipated themselves from these superstitions, and we may cite the
reply of Vespasian to his friends, who were alarmed at the evil presage
of a flaming comet: "Fear nothing," he said, "this bearded star concerns
me not; rather should it threaten my neighbor the King of the Parthians,
since he is hairy and I am bald."

In the year 837 one of these mysterious visitants appeared in the
Heavens. It was in the reign of Lewis the Debonair. Directly the King
perceived the comet, he sent for an astrologer, and asked what he was to
conclude from the apparition. As the answers were unsatisfactory he
tried to avert the augury by prayers to Heaven, by ordaining a general
fast to all his Court, and by building churches. Notwithstanding, he
died three years later, and the historians profited by this slender
coincidence to set up a correlation between the fatal star and the death
of the Sovereign. This comet, famous in history, is no other than that
of Halley, in one of its appearances.

This comet returned to explore the realms near the Sun in 1066, at the
moment when William of Normandy was undertaking the Conquest of England,
and was misguided enough to go across and reign in London, instead of
staying at home and annexing England, thus by his action founding the
everlasting rivalry between France and this island. A beneficial
influence was attributed to the comet in the Battle of Hastings.

A few centuries later it again came into sight from the Earth, in 1456,
three years after the capture of Constantinople by the Turks. Feeling
ran high in Europe, and this celestial omen was taken for a proof of the
anger of the Almighty. The moment was decisive; the Christians had to be
rescued from a struggle in which they were being worsted. At this
conjuncture, Pope Calixtus resuscitated a prayer that had fallen into
disuse, the _Angelus_; and ordered that the bells of the churches should
be rung each day at noon, that the Faithful might join at the same hour
in prayer against the Turks and the Comet. This custom has lasted down
to our own day.

Again, to the comet of 1500 was attributed the tempest that caused the
death of Bartholomew Diaz, a celebrated Portuguese navigator, who
discovered the Cape of Good Hope.

In 1528 a bearded star of terrific aspect alarmed the world, and the
more serious spirits were influenced by this menacing comet, which
burned in the Heavens like "a great and gory sword." In a chapter on
Celestial Monsters the celebrated surgeon Ambroise Paré describes this
awful phenomenon in terms anything but seductive, or reassuring, showing
us the menacing sword surrounded by the heads it had cut off (Fig. 50).

[Illustration: FIG. 50.--What our Ancestors saw in a Comet.

_After Ambroise Paré (1528)._]

[Illustration: FIG. 51.--Prodigies seen in the Heavens by our
Forefathers.]

Omens of battle, 1547.

Deer and warriors, July 19, 1550.

Cavalry, and a bloody branch crossing the sun, June 11, 1554.]

Our fathers saw many other prodigies in the skies; their descendants,
less credulous, can study the facsimile reproduced in Fig. 51, of the
drawings published in the year 1557 by Conrad Lycosthenes in his curious
Book of Prodigies.

So, too, it is asserted that Charles V renounced the jurisdiction of his
Estates, which were so vast that "the Sun never slept upon them,"
because he was terrified by the comet of 1556 which burned in the skies
with an alarming brilliancy, into passing the rest of his days in prayer
and devotion.

It is certain that comets often exhibit very strange characteristics,
but the imagination that sees in them such dramatic figures must indeed
be lively. In the Middle Ages and the Renaissance these were swords of
fire, bloody crosses, flaming daggers, etc., all horrible objects ready
to destroy our poor human race!

At the time of the Romans, Pliny made some curious distinctions between
them: "The Bearded Ones let loose their hair like a majestic beard; the
Javelin darts forth like an arrow; if the tail is shorter and ends in a
point, it is called the Sword; this is the palest of all the Comets; it
shines like a sword, without rays; the Plate or Disk is named in
conformity with its figure; its color is amber, the Barrel is actually
shaped like a barrel, as it might be in smoke, with light streaming
through it; the Horn imitates the figure of a horn erected in the sky,
and the Lamp that of a burning flame; the Equine represents a horse's
mane, shaken violently with a circular motion. There are bristled
comets; these resemble the skins of beasts with the fur on them, and are
surrounded by a nebulosity. Lastly, the tails of certain comets have
been seen to menace the sky in the form of a lance."

These hairy orbs that appear in all directions, and whose trajectories
are sometimes actually perpendicular to the plane of the ecliptic,
appear to obey no regular law. Even in the seventeenth century the
perspicacious Kepler had not divined their true character, seeing in
them, like most of his contemporaries, emanations from the earth, a sort
of vapor, losing itself in space. These erratic orbs could not be
assimilated with the other members of our grand solar family where,
generally speaking, everything goes on in regular order.

And even in our own times, have we not seen the people terrified at the
sight of a flaming comet? Has not the end of the world by the agency of
comets been often enough predicted? These predictions are so to speak
periodic; they crop up each time that the return of these cosmical
formations is announced by the astronomers, and always meet with a
certain number of timid souls who are troubled as to our destinies.

       *       *       *       *       *

To-day we know that these wanderers are subject to the general laws
that govern the universe. The great Newton announced that, like the
planets, they were obedient to universal attraction; that they must
follow an extremely elongated curve, and return periodically to the
focus of the ellipse. From the basis of these data Halley calculated the
progress of the comet of 1682, and ascertained that its motions
presented such similarity with the apparitions of 1531 and 1607, that he
believed himself justified in identifying them and in announcing its
return about the year 1759. Faithful to the call made upon it,
irresistibly attracted by the Orb of Day, the comet, at first pale, then
ardent and incandescent, returned at the date assigned to it by
calculation, three years after the death of the illustrious astronomer.
Shining upon his grave it bore witness to the might of human thought,
able to snatch the profoundest secrets from the Heavens!

This fine comet returns every seventy-six years, to be visible from the
Earth, and has already been seen twenty-four times by the astonished
eyes of man. It appears, however, to be diminishing in magnitude. Its
last appearance was in 1835, and we shall see it again in 1910, a little
sooner than its average period, the attraction of Jupiter having this
time slightly accelerated its course, while in 1759 it retarded it.

The comets thus follow a very elongated orbit, either elliptic, turning
round the Sun, or parabolic, dashing out into space. In the first case,
they are periodic (Fig. 52), and their return can be calculated. In the
second they surprise us unannounced, and return to the abysses of
eternity to reappear no more.

[Illustration: FIG. 52.--The orbit of a Periodic Comet.]

Their speed is even greater than that of the planets, it is equivalent
to this, multiplied by the square root of 2, that is to say by 1.414.
Thus at the distance of the Earth from the Sun this velocity = 29,500
meters (18 miles) per second, multiplied by the above number, that is,
41,700 meters (over 25 miles). At the distance of Mercury it = 47 ×
1.414 or 66,400 meters (over 40 miles) per second.

Among the numerous comets observed, we do not as yet know more than some
twenty of which the orbit has been determined. Periodicity in these
bearded orbs is thus exceptional, if we think of the innumerable
multitude of comets that circle through the Heavens. Kepler did not
exaggerate when he said "there are as many comets in the skies as there
are fishes in the sea." These scouts of the sidereal world constitute a
regular army, and if we are only acquainted with the dazzling generals
clad in gold, it is because the more modest privates can only be
detected in the telescope. Long before the invention of the latter,
these wanderers in the firmament roamed through space as in our own day,
but they defied the human eye, too weak to detect them. Then they were
regarded as rare and terrible objects that no one dared to contemplate.
To-day they may be counted by hundreds. They have lost in prestige and
in originality; but science is the gainer, since she has thus endowed
the solar system with new members. No year passes without the
announcement of three or four new arrivals. But the fine apparitions
that attract general attention by their splendor are rare enough.

These eccentric visitors do not resemble the planets, for they have no
opaque body like the Earth, Venus, Mars, or any of the rest. They are
transparent nebulosities, of extreme lightness, without mass nor
density. We have just photographed the comet of the moment, July, 1903:
the smallest stars are visible through its tail, and even through the
nucleus.

They arrive in every direction from the depths of space, as though to
reanimate themselves in the burning, luminous, electric solar center.

Attracted by some potent charm toward this dazzling focus, they come
inquisitive and ardent, to warm themselves at its furnace. At first pale
and feeble, they are born again when the Sun caresses them with his
fervid heat. Their motions accelerate, they haste to plunge wholly into
the radiant light. At length they burst out luminous and superb, when
the day-star penetrates them with his burning splendor, illuminates them
with a marvelous radiance, and crowns them with glory. But the Sun is
generous. Having showered benefits upon these gorgeous celestial
butterflies that flutter round him as round some altar of the gods, he
grants them liberty to visit other heavens, to seek fresh universes....

The original parabola is converted into an ellipse, if the imprudent
adventurer in returning to the Sun passes near some great planet, such
as Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, or Neptune, and suffers its attraction. It
is then imprisoned by our system, and can no longer escape from it.
After reenforcement at the solar focus, it must return to the identical
point at which it felt the first pangs of a new destiny. Henceforward,
it belongs to our celestial family, and circles in a closed curve.
Otherwise, it is free to continue its rapid course toward other suns and
other systems.

       *       *       *       *       *

As a rule, the telescope shows three distinct parts in a comet. There is
first the more brilliant central point, or _nucleus_, surrounded by a
nebulosity called the _hair_, or _brush_, and prolonged in a luminous
appendix stretching out into the _tail_. The _head_ of the comet is the
brush and the nucleus combined.

[Illustration: FIG. 53.--The tails of Comets are opposed to the Sun.]

It is usually supposed that the tail of a comet follows it throughout
the course of its peregrinations. Nothing of the kind. The appendix may
even precede the nucleus; it is always opposite the Sun,--that is to
say, it is situated on the prolongation of a straight line, starting
from the Sun, and passing through the nucleus (Fig. 53). The tail does
not exist, so long as the comet is at a distance from the orb of day;
but in approaching the Sun, the nebulosity is heated and dilates, giving
birth to those mysterious tails and fantastic streamers whose
dimensions vary considerably for each comet. The dilations and
transformations undergone by the tail suggest that they may be due to a
repulsive force emanating from the Sun, an electric charge transmitted
doubtless through the ether. It is as though Phoebus blew upon them
with unprecedented force.

Telescopic comets are usually devoid of tail, even when they reach the
vicinity of the Sun. They appear as pale nebulosities, rounded or oval,
more condensed toward the center, without, however, showing any distinct
nucleus. These stars are only visible for a minute fraction of their
course, when they reach a point not far from the Sun and the terrestrial
orbit.

The finest comets of the last century were those of 1811, 1843, 1858,
1861, 1874, 1880, 1881, and 1882. The Great Comet of 1811, after
spreading terror over certain peoples, notably in Russia, became the
providence of the vine-growers. As the wine was particularly good and
abundant that year, the peasants attributed this happy result to the
influence of the celestial visitant.

In 1843 one of these strange messengers from the Infinite appeared in
our Heavens. It was so brilliant that it was visible in full daylight on
February 28th, alongside of the Sun. This splendid comet was
accompanied by a marvelous rectilinear tail measuring 300000000
kilometers (186000000 miles) in length, and its flight was so rapid
that it turned the solar hemisphere at perihelion in two hours,
representing a speed of 550 kilometers (342 miles) a second.

But the most curious fact is that this radiant apparition passed so near
the Sun that it must have traversed its flames, and yet emerged from
them safe and sound.

Noteworthy also was the comet of 1858 (Fig. 49), discovered at Florence
by Donati. Its tail extended to a length of 90000000 kilometers
(55,900000 miles), and its nucleus had a diameter of at least 900
kilometers (559 miles). It is a curious coincidence that the wine was
remarkably excellent and abundant in that year also.

The comet of 1861 almost rivaled the preceding.

Coggia's Comet, in 1874, was also remarkable for its brilliancy, but was
very inferior to the last two. Finally, the latest worthy of mention
appeared in 1882. This magnificent comet also touched the Sun, traveling
at a speed of 480 kilometers (299 miles) per second. It crossed the
gaseous atmosphere of the orb of day, and then continued its course
through infinity. On the day of, and that following, its perihelion, it
could be detected with the unaided eye in full daylight, enthroned in
the Heavens beside the dazzling solar luminary. For the rest, it was
neither that of 1858 nor of 1861.

Since 1882 we have not been favored with a visit from any fine comet;
but we are prepared to give any such a reception worthy of their
magnificence: first, because now that we have fathomed them we are no
longer awestruck; second, because we would gladly study them more
closely.

       *       *       *       *       *

In short, these hirsute stars, whose fantastic appearance impressed the
imagination of our ancestors so vividly, are no longer formidable. Their
mass is inconsiderable; they seem to consist mainly of the lightest of
gases. Analysis of their incandescence reveals a spectrum closely
resembling that of many nebulæ; the presence of carbon is more
particularly obvious. Even the nucleus is not solid, and is often
transparent.

It is fair to say that the action of a comet might be deleterious if one
of these orbs were to arrive directly upon us. The transformation of
motion into heat, and the combination of the cometary gases with the
oxygen of our atmosphere might produce a conflagration, or a general
poisoning of the atmosphere.

But the collision of a comet with a planet is almost an impossibility.
This phenomenon could only occur if the comet crossed the planetary
orbit at the exact moment at which the planet was passing. When we
think of the immensity of space, of the extraordinary length of way
traversed by a world in its annual journey round the Sun, and the speed
of its rotation, we see why this coincidence is hardly likely to occur.
Thus, among the hundreds of comets catalogued, a few only cut the
terrestrial orbit. One of them, that of 1832, traversed the path of our
globe in the nights of October 29 and 30 in that year; but the Earth
only passed the same point thirty days later, and at the critical period
was more than 80000000 kilometers (50000000 miles) away from the
comet.

On June 30, 1861, however, the Earth passed through the extremity of the
tail of the Great Comet of that year. No one even noticed it. The
effects were doubtless quite immaterial.

In 1872 we were to collide with Biela's Comet, lost since 1852; now, as
we shall presently see, we came with flying colors out of that
disagreeable situation, because the comet had disintegrated, and was
reduced to powder. So we may sleep in peace as regards future danger
likely to come to us from comets. There is little fear of the
destruction of humanity by these windy bags.

These ethereal beauties whose blond locks float carelessly upon the
azure night are not concerned with us; they seem to have no other
preoccupation than to race from sun to sun, visiting new Heavens,
indifferent to the astonishment they produce in us. They speed
restlessly and tirelessly through infinity; they are the Amazons of
space.

What suns, what worlds must they have visited since the moment of their
birth! If these splendid fugitives could relate the story of their
wanderings, how gladly should we listen to the enchanting descriptions
of the various abodes they have journeyed to! But alas! these mysterious
explorers are dumb; they tell none of their secrets, and we must needs
respect their enigmatic silence.

Yet, some of them have left us a modest token of remembrance, an almost
impalpable nothing, sufficient, however, to enable us to address our
thanks to the considerate messenger.

       *       *       *       *       *

Can there be any one upon the Earth who has not been struck by the
phosphorescent lights that glide through the somber night, leaving a
brilliant silver or golden track--the luminous, ephemeral trail of a
meteor?

Sometimes, when Night has silently spread the immensity of her wings
above the weary Earth, a shining speck is seen to detach itself in the
shades of evening from the starry vault, shooting lightly through the
constellations to lose itself in the infinitude of space.

[Illustration: FIG. 54.--A Meteor.]

These bewitching sparks attract our eyes and chain our senses.
Fascinating celestial fireflies, their dainty flames dart in every
direction through space, sowing the fine dust of their gilded wings upon
the fields of Heaven. They are born to die; their life is only a breath;
yet the impression which they make upon the imagination of mortals is of
the profoundest.

The young girl dreaming in the delicious tranquillity of the transparent
night smiles at this charming sister in the Heavens (Fig. 54). What can
not this adorable star announce to the tender and loving heart? Is it
the shy messenger of the happiness so long desired? Its unpremeditated
appearance fills the soul with a ray of hope and makes it tremble. It is
a golden beam that glides into the heart, expanding it in the thrills of
a sudden and ephemeral pleasure.... The radiant meteor seems to quit the
velvet of the deep blue sky to respond to the appeal of the imploring
voice that seeks its succor.

What secrets has it not surprised! And who bears malice against it? It
is the friend of the betrothed who invoke its passage to confide their
wishes, and associate it with their dreams. Tradition holds that if a
wish be formulated during the visible passage of a meteor it will
certainly be fulfilled before the year is out. Between ourselves,
however, this is but a surviving figment of the ancestral imagination,
for this celestial jewel takes no such active part in the doings of
Humanity.... Besides, try to express a wish distinctly in a second!

It is a curious fact that while comets have so often spread terror on
the Earth, shooting stars should on the contrary have been regarded with
benevolent feelings at all times. And what is a shooting star? These
dainty excursionists from the celestial shores are not, as is supposed,
true stars. They are atoms, nothings, minute fragments deriving in
general from the disintegration of comets. They come to us from a vast
distance, from millions on millions of miles, and circle in swarms
around the Sun, following a very elongated ellipse which closely
resembles that of the cometary orbit. Their flight is extremely rapid,
reaching sometimes more than 40 kilometers (25 miles) per second, a
cometary speed that is, as we have seen, greatly above that of our
terrestrial vehicle, which amounts to 29 to 30 kilometers (about 19
miles).

These little corpuscles are not intrinsically luminous; but when the
orbit of a swarm of meteors crosses our planet, a violent shock arises,
the speed of which may be as great as 72 kilometers (45 miles) in the
first second if we meet the star shower directly; the average rate,
however, does not exceed 30 to 40 kilometers (19 to 25 miles), for these
meteors nearly always cross our path obliquely. The height at which they
arrive is usually 110 kilometers (68 miles), and 80 kilometers (50
miles) at the moment of disappearance of the meteor; but shooting stars
have been observed at 300 kilometers (186 miles).

The friction caused by this collision high up in the atmosphere
transforms the motion into heat. The molecules incandesce, and burn like
true stars with a brilliancy that is often magnificent.

But their glory is of short duration. The excessive heat resulting from
the shock consumes the poor firefly; its remains evaporate, and drop
slowly to the Earth, where they are deposited on the surface of the soil
in a sort of ferruginous dust mixed with carbon and nickel. Some one
hundred and forty-six milliards of them reach us annually, as seen by
the unaided eye, and many more in the telescope; the effect of these
showers of meteoric matter is an insensible increase in the mass of our
globe, a slight lessening of its rotary motion, and the acceleration of
the lunar movements of revolution.

Although the appearance of shooting stars is a common enough phenomenon,
visible every night of the year, there are certain times when they
arrive in swarms, from different quarters of the sky. The most
remarkable dates in this connection are the night of August 10th and the
morning of November 14th. Every one knows the shooting stars of August
10th, because they arrive in the fine warm summer evenings so favorable
to general contemplation of the Heavens. The phenomenon lasts till the
12th, and even beyond, but the maximum is on the 10th. When the sky is
very clear, and there is no moon, hundreds of shooting stars can be
counted on those three nights, sometimes thousands. They all seem to
come from the same quarter of the Heavens, which is called the
_radiant_, and is situated for the August swarm in the constellation of
Perseus, whence they have received the name of _Perseids_. Our
forefathers also called them the tears of St. Lawrence, because the
feast of that saint is on the same date. These shooting stars describe a
very elongated ellipse, and their orbit has been identified with that of
the Great Comet of 1862.

The shower of incandescent asteroids on November 14th is often much more
abundant than the preceding. In 1799, 1833, and 1866, the meteors were
so numerous that they were described as showers of rain, especially on
the first two dates. For several hours the sky was furrowed with falling
stars. An English mariner, Andrew Ellicot, who made the drawing we
reproduce (Fig. 55), described the phenomenon as stupendous and alarming
(November 12, 1799, 3 A.M.). The same occurred on November 13, 1833. The
meteors that scarred the Heavens on that night were reckoned at 240000.
These shooting stars received the name of _Leonids_, because their
radiant is situated in the constellation of the Lion.

[Illustration: FIG. 55.--Shooting Stars of November 12, 1799.

_From a contemporary drawing._]

This swarm follows the same orbit as the comet of 1866, which travels as
far as Uranus, and comes back to the vicinity of the Sun every
thirty-three years. Hence we were entitled to expect another splendid
apparition in 1899, but the expectations of the astronomers were
disappointed. All the preparations for the appropriate reception of
these celestial visitors failed to bring about the desired result. The
notes made in observatories, or in balloons, admitted of the
registration of only a very small number of meteors. The maximum was
thirteen. During that night, some 200 shooting stars were counted. There
were more in 1900, 1901, and, above all, in 1902. This swarm has become
displaced.

The night of November 27th again is visited by a number of shooting
stars that are the disaggregated remains of the Comet of Biela. This
comet, discovered by Biela in 1827, accomplished its revolution in six
and a half years, and down to 1846 it responded punctually to the
astronomers who expected its return as fixed by calculation. But on
January 13, 1846, the celestial wanderer broke in half: each fragment
went its own way, side by side, to return within sight from the Earth in
1852. It was their last appearance. That year the twin comets could
still be seen, though pale and insignificant. Soon they vanished into
the depths of night, and never appeared again. They were looked for in
vain, and were despaired of, when on November 27, 1872, instead of the
shattered comet, came a magnificent rain of shooting stars. They fell
through the Heavens, numerous as the flakes of a shower of snow.

The same phenomenon recurred on November 27, 1885, and confirmed the
hypothesis of the demolition and disaggregation of Biela's Comet into
shooting stars.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is an immense variety in the brilliancy of the shooting stars,
from the weak telescopic sparks that vanish like a flash of lightning,
to the incandescent _bolides_ or _fire-balls_ that explode in the
atmosphere.

Fig. 56 shows an example of these, and it represents a fire-ball
observed at the Observatory of Juvisy on the night of August 10, 1899.
It arrived from Cassiopeia, and burst in Cepheus.

This phenomenon may occur by day as well as by night. It is often
accompanied by one or several explosions, the report of which is
sometimes perceptible to a considerable distance, and by a shower of
meteorites. The globe of fire bursts, and splits up into luminous
fragments, scattered in all directions. The different parts of the
fire-ball fall to the surface of the Earth, under the name of aerolites,
or rather of uranoliths, since they arrive from the depths of space, and
not from our atmosphere.

From the most ancient times we hear of showers of uranoliths to which
popular superstitions were attached; and the Greeks even gave the name
of _Sideros_ to iron, the first iron used having been sidereal.

[Illustration: FIG. 56.--Fire-Ball seen from the Observatory at Juvisy,
August 10, 1899.]

[Illustration: FIG. 57.--Explosion of a Fire-Ball above Madrid,
February 10, 1896.]

No year passes without the announcement of several showers of
uranoliths, and the phenomenon sometimes causes great alarm to those who
witness it. One of the most remarkable explosions is that which occurred
above Madrid, February 10, 1896, a fragment from which, sent me by M.
Arcimis, Director of the Meteorological Institute, fell immediately in
front of the National Museum (Fig. 57). The phenomenon occurred at 9.30
A.M., in brilliant sunshine. The flash of the explosion was so dazzling
that it even illuminated the interior of the houses; an alarming clap of
thunder was heard seventy seconds after, and it was believed that an
explosion of dynamite had occurred. The fire-ball burst at a height of
fourteen miles, and was seen as far as 435 miles from Madrid!

In one of Raphael's finest pictures (_The Madonna of Foligno_) a
fire-ball may be seen beneath a rainbow (Fig. 58), the painter wishing
to preserve the remembrance of it, as it fell near Milan, on September
4, 1511. This picture dates from 1512.

The dimensions of these meteorites vary considerably; they are of all
sizes, from the impalpable dust that floats in the air, to the enormous
blocks exposed in the Museum of Natural History in Paris. Many of them
weigh several million pounds. That represented below fell in Mexico
during the shower of meteors of November 27, 1885. It weighed about four
pounds.

[Illustration: FIG. 58.--Raphael's Fire-Ball (_The Madonna of
Foligno_).]

These bolides and uranoliths come to us from the depths of space; but
they do not appear to have the same origin as the shooting stars. They
may arise from worlds destroyed by explosion or shock, or even from
planetary volcanoes. The lightest of them may have been expelled from
the volcanoes of the Moon. Some of the most massive, in which iron
predominates, may even have issued from the bowels of the Earth,
projected into space by some volcanic explosion, at an epoch when our
globe was perpetually convulsed by cataclysms of extraordinary violence.
They return to us to-day after being removed from the Earth to distances
proportional to the initial speed imparted to them. This origin seems
the more admissible as the stones that fall from the skies exhibit a
mineral composition identical with that of the terrestrial materials.

[Illustration: FIG. 59.--A Uranolith.]

In any case, these uranoliths bring us back at least by their fall to
our Earth, and from henceforward we will remain upon it, to study its
position in space, and to take account of the place it fills in the
Universe, and of the astronomical laws that govern our destiny.




CHAPTER VIII

THE EARTH


Our grand celestial journey lands us upon our own little planet, on this
globe that gravitates between Mars and Venus (between War and Love),
circulating like her brothers of the solar system, around the colossal
Sun.

The Earth! The name evokes in us the image of Life, and calls up the
theater of our activities, our ambitions, our joys and sorrows. Does it
not, in fact, to ignorant eyes, represent the whole of the universe?

And yet, what is the Earth?

The Earth is a star in the Heavens. We learned this much in our first
lesson. It is a globe of opaque material, similar to the planets
Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, etc., as previously described. Isolated
on all sides in space, it revolves round the Sun, along a vast orbit
that it accomplishes in a year. And while it thus glides along the lines
of solar attraction, the terrestrial ball rotates rapidly upon itself in
twenty-four hours.

These statements may appear dubious at first sight, and contradictory to
the evidence of our senses.

Now that the surface of the Earth has been explored in all directions,
there is no longer room to doubt that it is a globe, a sort of ball that
we adhere to. A journey round the world is common enough to-day, and
always yields the most complete evidence of the spherical nature of the
Earth. On the other hand, the curvature of the seas is a no less certain
proof. When a ship reaches the dark-blue line that appears to separate
the sky from the ocean, it seems to be hanging on the horizon. Little by
little, however, as it recedes, it drops below the horizon line; the
tops of the masts being the last to disappear. The observer on board
ship witnesses the same phenomenon. The low shores are first to
disappear, while the high coasts and mountains are much longer visible.

The aspect of the Heavens gives another proof of the Earth's rotundity.
As one travels North or South, new stars rise higher and higher above
the horizon in the one direction or the other, and those which shine in
the latitude one is leaving, gradually disappear. If the surface of the
Earth were flat, the ships on the sea would be visible as long as our
sight could pierce the distance, and all the stars of the Heavens would
be equally visible from the different quarters of the world.

Lastly, during the eclipses of the Moon, the shadow projected by the
Earth upon our satellite is always round. This is another proof of the
spherical nature of the terrestrial globe.

We described the Earth as an orb in the Heavens, similar to all the
other planets of the great solar family. We see these sister planets of
our world circulating under the starry vault, like luminous points whose
brilliancy is sometimes dazzling. For us they are marvelous celestial
birds hovering in the ether, upheld by invisible wings. The Earth is
just the same. It is supported by nothing. Like the soap-bubble that
assumes a lovely iridescence in the rays of the Sun, or, better, like
the balloon rapidly cleaving the air, it is isolated from every kind of
support.

Some minds have difficulty in conceiving this isolation, because they
form a false notion of weight.

The astronomers of antiquity, who divined it, knew not how to prevent
the Earth from falling. They asked anxiously what the strong bands
capable of holding up this block of no inconsiderable weight could be.
At first they thought it floated on the waters like an island. Then they
postulated solid pillars, or even supposed it might turn on pivots
placed at the poles. But on what would all these imaginary supports have
rested? All these fanciful foundations of the Earth had to be given up,
and it was recognized as a globe, isolated in every part. This illusion
of the ancients, which still obtains for a great many citizens of our
globule, arises, as we said, from a false conception of weight.

Weight and attraction are one and the same force.

A body can only fall when it is attracted, drawn by a more important
body. Now, in whatever direction we may wander upon the globe, our feet
are always downward. _Down_ is therefore the _center_ of the Earth.

The terrestrial globe may be regarded as an immense ball of magnet, and
its attraction holds us at its surface. We weigh toward the center. We
may travel over this surface in all directions; our feet will always be
below, whatever the direction of our steps. For us, "below" is the
inside of our planet, and "above" is the immensity of the Heavens that
extend above our heads, right round the globe.

This once understood, where could the Earth fall to? The question is an
absurdity. "Below" being toward the center, it would have to fall out of
itself.

Let us then picture the Earth as a vast sphere, detached from all that
exists around it, in the infinity of the Heavens. A point diametrically
opposed to another is called its _antipodes_. New Zealand is
approximately the antipodes to France. Well, for the inhabitants of New
Zealand and of France the top is reciprocally opposed, and the bottom,
or the feet, are diametrically in opposition. And yet, for one as for
the other, the bottom is the soil they are held to, and the top is
space above their heads.

The Earth turns on itself in twenty-four hours. Whatever is above us,
_e.g._, at midday, we call high; twelve hours later, at midnight, we
give the same qualification to the part of space that was under our feet
at noon. What is in the sky, and over our heads, at a given hour, is
under our feet, and yet always in the sky, twelve hours later. Our
position, in relation to the space that surrounds us, changes from hour
to hour, and "top" and "bottom" vary also, relatively to our position.

Our planet is thus a ball, slightly flattened at the poles (by about
1/292). Its diameter, at the equator, is 12,742 kilometers (7,926
miles); from one pole to the other is a little less, owing to the
flattening of the polar caps. The difference is some 43 kilometers
(about 27 miles).

Its circumference is 40000 kilometers (24,900 miles). This ball is
surrounded by an aerial envelope, the atmosphere, the height of which
can not be less than 300 kilometers (186 miles), according to the
observations made on certain shooting stars.

We all know that this layer of air, at the bottom of which we live, is a
beautiful azure blue that seems to separate us from the sidereal abyss,
spreading over our heads in a kind of vault that is often filled with
clouds, and giving the illusion of resting far off on the circle of the
horizon. But this is only an illusion. In reality, there is neither
vault nor horizon; space is open in all directions. If the atmosphere
did not exist, or if it were completely transparent, we should see the
stars by day as by night, for they are continually round us, at noon as
at midnight, and we can see them in the full daylight, with the help of
astronomical instruments. In fact, certain stars (the radiant Venus and
the dazzling Jupiter) pierce the veil of the atmosphere, and are visible
with the unaided eye in full daylight.

The terrestrial surface is 510000000 square kilometers (200000000
square miles). The waters of the ocean cover three-quarters of this
surface, _i.e._, 383,200000 square kilometers (150000000 square
miles), and the continents only occupy 136,600000 square kilometers
(55000 square miles). France represents about the thousandth part of
the total superficies of the globe.

Despite the asperities of mountain ranges, and the abysses hollowed out
by the waters, the terrestrial globe is fairly regular, and in relation
to its volume its surface is smoother than that of an orange. The
highest summits of the Himalaya, the profoundest depths of the somber
ocean, do not attain to the millionth part of its diameter.

In weight, the Earth is five and a half times heavier than would be a
globe of water of the same dimensions. That is to say:

          6,957,930000000000000000000 kilograms
          (6,833000000000000000000 tons).

The atmospheric atmosphere with which it is surrounded represents.

          6,263000000000000000 kilograms
          (6,151000000000000 tons).

Each of us carries an average weight of some 17000 kilograms (16 tons)
upon his shoulders. Perhaps some one will ask how it is that we are not
crushed by this weight, which is out of all proportion with our
strength, but to which, nevertheless, we appear insensible. It is
because the aerial fluid enclosed within our bodies exerts a pressure
equal and opposite to the external atmospheric pressure, and these
pressures are at equilibrium.

The Earth is characterized by no essential or particular differences
relatively to the other worlds of our system. Like Venus of the limpid
rays, like the dazzling Jupiter, like all the planets, she courses
through space, carrying into Infinitude our hopes and destinies. Bigger
than Mercury, Venus, and Mars, she presents a very modest figure in
comparison with the enormous Jupiter, the strange system of Saturn, of
Uranus, and even of Neptune. For us her greatest interest is that she
serves as our residence, and if she were not our habitation we should
scarcely notice her. Dark in herself, she burns at a distance like a
star, returning to space the light she receives from the Sun. At the
distance of our satellite, she shines like an enormous moon, fourteen
times larger and more luminous than our gentle Phoebe. Observed from
Mercury or Venus, she embellishes the midnight sky with her sparkling
purity as Jupiter does for us. Seen from Mars, she is a brilliant
morning and evening star, presenting phases similar to those which Mars
and Venus show from here. From Jupiter, the terrestrial globe is little
more than an insignificant point, nearly always swallowed up in the
solar rays. As to the Saturnians, Uranians, and Neptunians, if such
people exist, they probably ignore our existence altogether. And in all
likelihood it is the same for the rest of the universe.

We must cherish no illusions as to the importance of our natal world. It
is true that the Earth is not wanting in charm, with its verdant plains
enameled in the delicious tones of a robust and varied vegetation, its
plants and flowers, its spring-time and its birds, its limpid rivers
winding through the meadows, its mountains covered with forests, its
vast and profound seas animated with an infinite variety of living
creatures. The spectacle of Nature is magnificent, superb, admirable
and marvelous, and we imagine that this Earth fills the universe, and
suffices for it. The Sun, the Moon, the stars, the boundless Heavens,
seem to have been created for us, to charm our eyes and thoughts, to
illumine our days, and shed a gentle radiance upon our nights. This is
an agreeable illusion of our senses. If our Humanity were extinguished,
the other worlds of the Heavens, Venus, Mars, etc., would none the less
continue to gravitate in the Heavens along with our defunct planet, and
the close of human life (for which everything seems to us to have been
created) would not even be perceived by those other worlds, that
nevertheless are our neighbors. There would be no revolution, no
cataclysm. The stars would go on shining in the firmament, just as they
do to-day, shedding their divine light over the immensity of the
Heavens. Nothing would be changed in the general aspect of the Universe.
The Earth is only a modest atom, lost in the innumerable army of the
worlds and suns that people the universe.

       *       *       *       *       *

Every morning the Sun rises in the East, setting fire with his ardent
rays to the sky, which is dazzling with his splendor. He ascends through
space, reaches a culminating point at noon, and then descends toward the
West, to sink at night into the purple of the sunset.

And then the stars, grand lighthouses of the Heavens, in their turn
incandesce. They too rise in the East, ascend the vault of Heaven, and
then descend to the West, and vanish. All the orbs, Sun, Moon, planets,
stars, appear to revolve round us in twenty-four hours.

This journey of the orbs around us is only an illusion of the senses.

Whether the Earth be at rest, and the sky animated with a rotary
movement round her, or whether, on the contrary, the stars are fixed,
and the Earth in motion, in either case, for us appearances are the
same. If the Earth turns, carrying all that pertains to it in its
motion--the seas, the atmosphere, the clouds, and ourselves,--we are
unable to perceive it, because all the objects that surround us keep
their respective positions among themselves. Hence we must resort to
logic, and reason out the two hypotheses.

For the accomplishment of this rapid journey of the Sun and stars around
the Earth, it would be necessary that all the orbs of the sky should be
in some way attached to a vault, or to circles, as was formerly
supposed. This conception is childish. The peoples of antiquity had no
notion of the size of the universe, and their error is almost excusable.
The distance separating Heaven from the Infernal Regions has been
measured, according to Hesiod, by Vulcan's anvil, which fell from the
skies to the Earth in nine days and nine nights, and it would have
taken as long again to continue its journey from the surface of the
Earth to the bowels of Hades.

To-day we have a more exact notion of the grandeur of the Universe. We
know that millions and trillions of miles separate the stars from one
another. And by representing these distances, we can form some idea of
the difficulty there would be in admitting the rotation of the universe
round the Earth.

The distance from here to the Sun is 149000000 kilometers (93000000
miles). In order to turn in twenty-four hours round the Earth, that orb
would have to fly through Space at a velocity of more than 10000
kilometers (6,200 miles) a second.

Yes! the Sun, splendid orb, source of our existence and of that of all
the planets, a colossal globe, over a million times more voluminous than
the Earth, and 324 thousand times heavier, would have to accomplish this
immense revolution in order to turn round the minute point that is our
lilliputian world!

This in itself would suffice to convince us of the want of logic in such
an argument. But the Sun is not alone in the Heavens. We should have to
suppose that all the planets and all the stars were engaged in the same
fantastic motions.

Jupiter is about five times as far off as the Sun; his velocity would
have to be 53000 kilometers (32,860 miles) per second.

Neptune, thirty times farther off, would have to execute 320000
kilometers (198000 miles) per second.

The nearest star, [alpha] of the Centaur, situated at a distance 275000
times that of the Sun, would have to run, to fly through space, at a
rate of 2,941000000 kilometers (1,823,420000 miles) per second.

All the other stars are incomparably farther off, at infinity.

And this fantastic rotation would all be accomplished round a minute
point!

To put the problem in this way is to solve it. Unless we deny the
astronomic measures, and the most convincing geometric operations, the
Earth's diurnal motion of rotation is a certainty.

To suppose that the stars revolve round the Earth is to suppose, as one
author humorously suggests, that in order to roast a pheasant the
chimney, the kitchen, the house, and all the countryside must needs turn
round it.

If the Earth turns in twenty-four hours upon itself, a point upon the
equator would simply travel at a rate of 465 meters (1,525 feet) per
second. This speed, while considerable in comparison with the movements
observed upon the surface of our planet, is as nothing compared with
the fantastic rapidity at which the Sun and stars would have to move, in
order to rotate round our globe.

Thus we have to choose between these two hypotheses: either to make the
entire Heavens turn round us in twenty-four hours, or to suppose our
globe to be animated by a motion of rotation upon itself. For us, the
impression is the same, and as we are insensible to the motion of the
Earth, its immobility would seem almost natural to us. So that, in last
resort, here as in many other instances, the decision must be made by
simple common sense. Science long ago made its choice. Moreover, all the
progress of Astronomy has confirmed the rotary movement of the Earth in
twenty-four hours, and its movement of revolution round the Sun in a
year; while at the same time a great number of other motions have been
discovered for our wandering planet.

The learned philosophers of antiquity divined the double movement of our
planet. The disciples of Pythagoras taught it more than two thousand
years ago, and the ancient authors quote among others Nicetas of
Syracuse, and Aristarchus of Samos, as being among the first to promote
the doctrine of the Earth's movement. But at that remote period no one
had any idea of the real distances of the stars, and the argument did
not seem to be based on any adequate evidence. Ptolemy, after a long
discussion of the diurnal motion of our planet, refutes it, giving as
his principal reason that if the Earth turned, the objects that were not
fixed to its surface would appear to move in a contrary direction, and
that a body shot into the air would fall back to the West of its
starting-point, the Earth having turned meantime from West to East. This
objection has no weight, because the Earth controls not only all the
objects fixed to the soil, but also the atmosphere, and the clouds that
surround it like a light veil, and all that exists upon its surface. The
atmosphere, the clouds, the waters of the ocean, things and beings, all
are adherent to it and make one body with it, participating in its
movement, as sometimes happens to ourselves in the compartment of a
train, or the car of an aerostat. When, for instance, we drop an object
out of such a car, this object, animated with the acquired velocity,
does not fall to a point below the aerostat, but follows the balloon, as
though it were gliding along a thread. The author has made this
experiment more than once in aerial journeys.

Thus, the hypothesis of the Earth's motion has become a certainty. But
in addition to reasoning, direct proof is not wanting.

1. The spheroidal shape of the Earth, slightly flattened at the poles
and swollen at the equator, has been produced by the rotary motion, by
the centrifugal force that it engenders.

2. In virtue of this centrifugal force, which is at its maximum at the
equator, objects lose a little of their weight in proportion as they are
farther removed from the polar regions where centrifugal force is almost
_nil_.

3. In virtue of this same centrifugal force, the length of the pendulum
in seconds is shorter at the equator than in Paris, and the difference
is one of 3 millimeters.

4. A weight abandoned to itself and falling from a certain height,
should follow the vertical if the Earth were motionless. Experiment,
frequently repeated, shows a slight deviation to the East, of the
plumb-line that marks the vertical. We more especially observed this at
the Pantheon during the recent experiments.

5. The magnificent experiment of Foucault at the Pantheon, just renewed
under the auspices of the Astronomical Society of France, demonstrates
the rotary motion of the Earth to all beholders. A sufficiently heavy
ball (28 kilograms, about 60 pounds) is suspended from the dome of the
edifice by an excessively fine steel thread. When the pendulum is in
motion, a point attached to the bottom of the ball marks its passage
upon two little heaps of sand arranged some yards away from the center.
At each oscillation this point cuts the sand, and the furrow gets
gradually longer to the right hand of an observer placed at the center
of the pendulum. The plane of the oscillations remains fixed, but the
Earth revolves beneath, from West to East. The fundamental principle of
this experiment is that the plane in which any pendulum is made to
oscillate remains invariable even when the point of suspension is
turned. This demonstration enables us in some measure to see the Earth
turning under our feet.

The annual displacements of the stars are again confirmatory of the
Earth's motion round the Sun. During the course of the year, the stars
that are least remote from our solar province appear to describe minute
ellipses, in perspective, in the Heavens. These small apparent
variations in the position of the nearest stars reproduce the annual
rotation of the Earth round the Sun, in perspective.

We could adduce further observations in favor of this double movement,
but the proofs just given are sufficiently convincing to leave no doubt
in the mind of the reader.

Nor are these two the only motions by which our globe is rocked in
space. To its diurnal rotation and its annual rotation we may add
another series of _ten more motions_: some very slow, fulfilling
themselves in thousands of years, others, more rapid, being constantly
renewed. It is, however, impossible in these restricted pages to enter
into the detail reserved for more complete works. We must not forget
that our present aim is to sum up the essentials of astronomical
knowledge as simply as possible, and to offer our readers only the "best
of the picking."

       *       *       *       *       *

The two principal motions of which we have just spoken give us the
measure of time, the day of twenty-four hours, and the year of 365-1/4
days.

The Earth turning upon itself in twenty-four hours from West to East,
presents all its parts in succession to the Sun fixed in space.
Illuminated countries have the day, those opposite, in the shadow of the
Earth, are plunged into night. The countries carried by the Earth toward
the Sun have morning, those borne toward his shadow, evening. Those
which receive the rays of the day-star directly have noon; those which
are just opposite have midnight.

The rotation of our planet in this way gives us the measure of time; it
has been divided arbitrarily into twenty-four periods called hours; each
hour into sixty minutes; each minute into sixty seconds.

In consequence, each country turns in twenty-four hours round the axis
of the Earth. The difference in hours between the different regions of
the globe is therefore regulated by the difference of geographical
position. The countries situated to the West are behind us; the Sun only
gets there after it has shone upon our meridian. When it is midday in
Paris, it is only 11.51 A.M. in London; 11.36 A.M. in Madrid; 11.14 A.M.
at Lisbon; 11.12 A.M. at Mogador; 7.06 A.M. at Quebec; 6.55 A.M. at New
York; 5.14 A.M. in Mexico; and so on. The countries situated to the East
are, on the contrary, ahead of us. When it is noon in Paris, it is
already 56 minutes after midday at Vienna; 1.25 P.M. at Athens; 2.21
P.M. at Moscow; 3.16 P.M. at Teheran; 4.42 P.M. at Bombay; and so on. We
are here speaking of real times, and not of the conventional times.

[Illustration: FIG. 60.--Motion of the Earth round the Sun.]

If we could make the tour of the world in twenty-four hours, starting
at midday from some place to go round the globe, and traveling westward
with the Sun, we should have him always over our heads. In traveling
round the world from West to East, one goes in front of the Sun, and
gains by one day; in taking the opposite direction, from East to West,
one loses a day.

In reality, the exact duration of the Earth's diurnal rotation is
twenty-three hours, fifty-six minutes, four seconds. That is the
sidereal day. But, while turning upon itself, the Earth circulates upon
its orbit, and at the end of a diurnal rotation it is still obliged to
turn during three minutes, fifty-six seconds in order to present exactly
the same meridian to the fixed Sun which, in consequence of the rotary
period of our planet, is a little behind. The solar day is thus one of
twenty-four hours. There are 366 rotations in the year.

And now let us come back to the consequences of the Earth's motion. In
the first place our planet does not turn vertically nor on its side, but
is tipped or inclined a certain quantity: 23° 27'.

Now, throughout its annual journey round the Sun, the inclination
remains the same. That is what produces the seasons and climates. The
countries which have a larger circle to travel over in the hemisphere of
the solar illumination have the longer days, those which have a smaller
circle, shorter days. At the equator there is constantly, and all
through the year, a twelve-hour day, and a night of twelve hours.

[Illustration: FIG. 61.--Inclination of the Earth.]

In summer, the pole dips toward the Sun, and the rays of the orb of day
cover the corresponding hemisphere with their light. Six months later
this same hemisphere is in winter, and the opposite hemisphere is in its
turn presented to the Sun. June 21 is the summer solstice for the
northern hemisphere, and is at the same time winter for the southern
pole. Six months later, on December 21, we have winter, while the
southern hemisphere is completely exposed to the Sun. Between these two
epochs, when the radiant orb shines exactly upon the equator, that is on
March 21, we have the spring equinox, that delicious flowering season
when all nature is enchanting and enchanted; on September 21 we have the
autumn equinox, melancholy, but not devoid of charm.

The terrestrial sphere has been divided into different zones, with which
the different climates are in relation:

1. The tropical zone, which extends 23° 27' from one part to the other
of the equator. This is the hottest region. It is limited by the circle
of the tropics.

2. The temperate zones, which extend from 23° 27' to 66° 23' of
latitude, and where the Sun sets every day.

3. The glacial zones, drawn round the poles, at 66° 33' latitude, where
the Sun remains constantly above or below the horizon for several days,
or even several months. These glacial zones are limited by the polar
circles.

We must add that the _axis_ of the Earth is a straight line that is
supposed to pass through the center of the globe and come out at two
diametrically opposite points called the _poles_. The diurnal rotation
of the Earth is effected round this axis.

The name _equator_ is given to a great circle situated between the two
poles, at equal distance, which divides the globe into two hemispheres.
The equator is divided into 360 parts or degrees, by other circles that
go from one pole to the other. These are the _longitudes_ or meridians
(see Fig. 62). The distance between the equator and the pole is divided
into larger or smaller circles, which have received the name of
_latitudes_, 90 degrees are reckoned on the one side and the other of
the equator, in the direction of the North and South poles,
respectively. The longitudes are reckoned from some point either to East
or West: the latitudes are reckoned North and South, from the equator.
In going from East to West, or inversely, the longitude changes, but in
passing from North to South of any spot, it is the latitude that alters.

[Illustration: FIG. 62.--The divisions of the globe. Longitudes and
latitudes.]

The circles of latitude are smaller in proportion as one approaches the
poles. The circumference of the world is 40,076,600 meters at the
equator. At the latitude of Paris (48° 50') it is only 26,431,900
meters. A point situated at the equator has more ground to travel over
in order to accomplish its rotation in twenty-four hours than a point
nearer the pole.

We have already stated that this velocity of rotation is 465 meters per
second at the equator. At the latitude of Paris it is not more than 305
meters. At the poles it is _nil_.

The longitudes, or meridians, are great circles of equal length,
dividing the Earth into quarters, like the parts of an orange or a
melon. These circumvent the globe, and measure some 40000000
(40,008,032) meters. We may remember in passing that the length of the
meter has been determined as, by definition, the ten-millionth part of
the quarter of a celestial meridian.

Thus, while rotating upon itself, the Earth spins round the Sun, along a
vast orbit traced at 149000000 kilometers (93000000 miles) from the
central focus, a sensibly elliptical orbit, as we have already pointed
out. It is a little nearer the Sun on January 1st than on July 1st, at
its perihelion (_peri_, near, _helios_, Sun), than at its aphelion
(_apo_, far, _helios_, Sun). The difference = 6000000 kilometers
(3,720000 miles), and its velocity is a little greater at perihelion
than at aphelion.

This second motion produces the _year_. It is accomplished in three
hundred and sixty-five days, six hours, nine minutes, nine seconds.
Such is the complete revolution of our planet round the orb of day. It
has received the name of sidereal year. But this is not how we calculate
the year in practical life. The civil year, known also as the tropical
year, is not equivalent to the Earth's revolution, because a very slow
gyratory motion, called "the precession of the equinoxes," the cycle of
which occupies 25,765 years, drags the spring equinox back some twenty
minutes in each year.

The civil year is, accordingly, three hundred and sixty-five days, five
hours, forty-eight minutes, forty-six seconds.

In order to simplify the calendar, this accumulating fraction of five
hours, forty-eight minutes, forty-six seconds (about a quarter day) is
added every four years to a bissextile year (leap-year), and thus we
have uneven years of three hundred and sixty-five, and three hundred and
sixty-six days. Every year of which the figure is divisible by four is a
leap-year. By adding a quarter day to each year, there is a surplus of
eleven minutes, fourteen seconds. These are subtracted every hundred
years by not taking as bissextile those secular years of which the
radical is not divisible by four. The year 1600 was leap-year: 1700,
1800, and 1900 were not; 2000 will be. The agreement between the
calendar and nature has thus been fairly perfect, since the
establishment of the Gregorian Calendar in 1582.

Since the terrestrial orbit measures not less than 930000000
kilometers (576,600000 miles), which must be traversed in a year, the
Earth flies through Space at 2,544000 kilometers (1,577,280 miles) a
day, or 106000 kilometers (65,720 miles) an hour, or 29,500 meters (18
miles) per second on an average, a little faster at perihelion, a little
slower at aphelion. This giddy course, a thousand times more rapid than
the speed of an express-train, is effected without commotion, shock, or
noise. Reasoning alone enables us to divine the prodigious movement that
carries us along in the vast fields of the Infinite, in mid-heaven.

Returning to the calendar, it must be remarked in conclusion, that the
human race has not exhibited great sense in fixing the New Year on
January 1. No more disagreeable season could have been selected. And
further, as the ancient Roman names of the months have been preserved,
which in the time of Romulus began with March, the "seventh" month,
"September," is our ninth month; October (the eighth) is the tenth;
November (the ninth) has become the eleventh; and December (the tenth)
has taken the place of the twelfth. Verily, we are not hard to please!

These months, again, are unequal, as every one knows. Witness the
simple expedient of remembering the long and short months, by closing
the left hand and counting the knobs and hollows of the fist, the former
corresponding to the long months, the latter to the short: first knob =
January; first hollow, February; second knob, March; and so on.[12]

[Illustration: FIG. 63.--To find the long and short months.]

Should not the real renewal of the year coincide with the awakening of
Nature, with the spring on the terrestrial hemisphere occupied by the
greater portion of Humanity, with the date of March 21st? Should not the
months be equalized, and their names modified? Why should we not follow
the beautiful evolution dictated by the Sun and by the movement of our
planet? But our poor Earth may roll on a long time yet before its
inhabitants will become reasonable.




CHAPTER IX

THE MOON


It is the delightful hour when all Nature pauses in the tranquil calm of
the silent night.

The Sun has cast his farewell gleams upon the weary Earth. All sound is
hushed. And soon the stars will shine out one by one in the bosom of the
somber firmament. Opposite to the sunset, in the east, the Full Moon
rises slowly, as it were calling our thoughts toward the mysteries of
eternity, while her limpid night spreads over space like a dew from
Heaven.

In the odorous woods, the trees are silhouetted strangely upon the sky,
seeming to stretch their knotted arms toward this celestial beauty. On
the river, smooth as a mirror, wherein the pale Phoebe reflects her
splendor, the maidens go to seek the floating image of their future
spouse. And in response to their prayers, she rends the veil of cloud
that hides her from their eyes, and pours the reflection of her gentle
beams upon the sleeping waters.

From all time the Moon has had the privilege of charming the gaze, and
attracting the particular attention of mortals. What thoughts have not
been wafted to her pale, yet luminous disk? Orb of mystery and of
solitude, brooding over our silent nights, this celestial luminary is at
once sad and splendid in her glacial purity, and her limpid rays provoke
a reverie full of charm and melancholy. Mute witness of terrestrial
destinies, her nocturnal flame watches over our planet, following it in
its course as a faithful satellite.

The human eye first uplifted to the Heavens was struck, above all, with
the brilliancy of this solitary globe, straying among the stars. The
Moon first suggested an easy division of time into months and weeks, and
the first astronomical observations were limited to the study of her
phases.

Daughter of the Earth, the Moon was born at the limits of the
terrestrial nebula, when our world was still no more than a vast gaseous
sphere, and was detached from her at some critical period of colossal
solar tide. Separating with regret from her cradle, but attached to the
Earth by indissoluble ties of attraction, she rotates round us in a
month, from west to east, and this movement keeps her back a little each
day in relation to the stars. If we watch, evening by evening, beginning
from the new moon, we shall observe that she is each night a little
farther to the left, or east, than on the preceding evening. This
revolution of the Moon around our planet produces the phases, and gives
the measure of our months.

[Illustration: FIG. 64.--The Full Moon slowly rises.]

During her monthly journey she always presents the same face to us. One
might think that the fear of losing us had immobilized her globe, and
prevented her from turning. And so we only know of her the vague sketch
of a human face that has been observed through all the ages.

It seems, in fact, as though she were looking down upon us from the
Heavens, the more so as the principal spots of her disk vaguely recall
the aspect of a face. If we try to draw it without the aid of
instruments we observe dark regions and clear regions that each
interprets in his own fashion. To the author, for instance, the full
Moon has the appearance represented in the following figure. The spots
resemble two eyes and the sketch of a nose; resulting in a vague human
figure, as indicated on the lower disk. Others see a man carrying a
bundle of wood, a hare, a lion, a dog, a kangaroo, a sickle, two heads
embracing, etc.[13] But generally speaking, there is a tendency to see a
human figure in it.

If this appearance is helped a little by drawing, it gives the profile
of a man's head fairly well sketched, and furnished with an abundant
crop of hair (Fig. 66). Others go much more into detail, and draw a
woman's head that is certainly too definite, like this of M. Jean Sardou
(Fig. 67). Others, again, like M. Zamboni, see behind the man's profile
the likeness of a young girl being embraced by him (Fig. 68). There is
certainly some imagination about these. And yet, on the first suitable
occasion, look at the Moon through an opera-glass, a few days after the
first quarter, and you will not fail to see the masculine profile just
described, and even to imagine the "kiss in the Moon."

[Illustration: FIG. 65.--The Moon viewed with the unaided eye.]

[Illustration: FIG. 66.--The Man's head in the Moon.]

These vague aspects disappear as soon as the Moon is examined with even
the least powerful instruments: the spots are better defined, and the
illusions of indistinct vision vanish. Compare this direct photograph of
the Moon, taken by the author some years ago (Fig. 69): here is neither
a human figure, man, dog, hare, nor faggot; simply deep geographical
configurations, and in the lower region, a luminous point whence certain
light bands spread out, some being prolonged to a considerable distance.
And yet, from a little way off, does it not form the man's face above
indicated?

[Illustration: FIG. 67.--Woman's head in the Moon.]

From the earliest astronomical observations made with the aid of
instruments by Galileo, in 1609, people tried to find out what the dark
spots could represent, and they were called seas, because water absorbs
light, and reflects it less than _terra firma_. The Moon of itself
possesses no intrinsic light, any more than our planet, and only shines
by the light of the Sun that illuminates it. As it rotates round the
Earth, and constantly changes its position with respect to the Sun, we
see more or less of its illuminated hemisphere, and the result is the
phases that every one knows so well.

[Illustration: FIG. 68.--The kiss in the Moon.]

[Illustration: FIG. 69.--Photograph of the Moon.]

At the commencement of each lunation, the Moon is between the Sun and
the Earth, and its non-illuminated hemisphere is turned toward us. This
is the New Moon, invisible to us; but two days later, the slim crescent
of Diana sheds a gentle radiance upon the Earth. Gradually the crescent
enlarges. When the Moon arrives at right angles with ourselves and with
the Sun, half the illuminated hemisphere is presented to us. This is the
first quarter. At the time of Full Moon, it is opposite the Sun, and we
see the whole of the hemisphere illuminated. Then comes the decline: the
brilliant disk is slightly corroded at first; it diminishes from day to
day, and about a week before the New Moon our fair friend only shows her
profile before she once more passes in front of the Sun: this is the
last quarter.

[Illustration: FIG. 70.--The Moon's Phases.]

When the Moon is crescent, in the first evenings of the lunation, and
after the last quarter, the rest of the disk is visible, illuminated
feebly by a pale luminosity. This is known as the ashy light. It is due
to the shine of the Earth, reflecting the light received from the Sun
into space. Accordingly the ashy light is the reflection of our own sent
back to us by the Moon. It is the reflection of a reflection.

This rotation of the Moon round the Earth is accomplished in
twenty-seven days, seven hours, forty-three minutes, eleven seconds; but
as the Earth is simultaneously revolving round the Sun, when the Moon
returns to the same point (the Earth having become displaced relatively
to the Sun), the Moon has to travel two days longer to recover its
position between the Sun and the Earth, so that the lunar month is
longer than the sidereal revolution of the Moon, and takes twenty-nine
days, twelve hours, forty-four minutes, three seconds. This is the
duration of the sequence of phases.

This revolution is accomplished at a distance of 384000 kilometers
(238000 miles). The velocity of the Moon in its orbit is more than 1
kilometer (0.6214 mile) per second. But our planet sweeps it through
space at a velocity almost thirty times greater.

The diameter of the Moon represents 273/1000 that of the Earth, _i.e._,
3,480 kilometers (2,157 miles).

Its surface = 38000000 square kilometers (15000000 square miles), a
little more than the thirteenth part of the terrestrial surface, which
= 510000000 (200000000 square miles).

In volume, the Moon is fifty times less than the Earth. Its mass or
weight is only 1/81 that of the terrestrial globe. Its density = 0.615,
relatively to that of the Earth, _i.e._, a little more than three times
that of water. Weight at its surface is very little: 0.174. A kilogram
transported thither would only weigh 174 grams.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the meager distance of 384000 kilometers (238000 miles) that
separates us from it (about thirty times the diameter of the Earth), the
Moon is a suburb of our terrestrial habitation. What does this small
distance amount to? It is a mere step in the universe.

A telegraphic message would get there in one and a half second; a
projectile fired from a gun would arrive in eight days, five hours; an
express-train would be due in eight months, twenty-two days. It is only
the 1/388 part of the distance that separates us from the Sun, and only
the 100/1000000 part of the distance of the stars nearest to us. Many
men have tramped the distance that separates us from the Moon. A bridge
of thirty terrestrial globes would suffice to unite the two worlds.

Owing to this great proximity, the Moon is the best known of all the
celestial spheres. Its geographical (or more correctly,
selenographical, _Selene_, moon) map was drawn out more than two
centuries ago, at first in a vague sketch, and afterward with more
details, until to-day it is as precise and accurate as any of our
terrestrial maps of geography.

Before the invention of the telescope, from antiquity to the seventeenth
century, people lost themselves in conjectures as to the nature of this
strange lunar figure. It was held to be a mysterious world, the more
extraordinary in that it always presented the same face to us. Some
compared it to an immense mirror reflecting the image of the Earth.
Others pictured it as a silver star, an enchanted abode where all was
wealth and happiness. For many a long day it was the fashion to think,
quite irrationally, that the inhabitants of the Moon were fifteen times
bigger than ourselves.

The invention of telescopes, however, brought a little order and a grain
of truth into these fantastic assumptions. The first observations of
Galileo revolutionized science, and his discoveries filled the
best-ordered minds with enthusiasm. Thenceforward, the Moon became our
property, a terrestrial suburb, where the whole world would gladly have
installed itself, had the means of getting there been as swift as the
wings of the imagination. It became easy enough to invent a thousand
enchanting descriptions of the charms of our fair sister, and no one
scrupled to do so. Soon, it was observed that the Moon closely resembled
the Earth in its geological features; its surface bristles with sharp
mountain peaks that light up in so many luminous points beneath the rays
of the Sun. Alongside, dark and shaded parts indicate the plains;
moreover, there are large gray patches that were supposed to be seas
because they reflect the solar light less perfectly than the adjacent
countries. At that epoch hardly anything was known of the physical
constitution of the Moon, and it was figured as enveloped with an
atmospheric layer, analogous to that at the bottom of which we carry on
our respiration.

To-day we know that these "seas" are destitute of water, and that if the
lunar globe possesses an atmosphere, it must be excessively light.

The Moon became the favorite object of astronomers, and the numerous
observations made of it authorized the delineation of very interesting
selenographic charts. In order to find one's way among the seas, plains,
and mountains that make up the lunar territory, it was necessary to name
them. The seas were the first to be baptized, in accordance with their
reputed astrological influences. Accordingly, we find on the Moon, the
Sea of Fecundity, the Lake of Death, the Sea of Humors, the Ocean of
Tempests, the Sea of Tranquillity, the Marsh of Mists, the Lake of
Dreams, the Sea of Putrefaction, the Peninsula of Reverie, the Sea of
Rains, etc.

With regard to the luminous parts and the mountains, it was at first
proposed to call them after the most illustrious astronomers, but the
fear of giving offense acted as a check on Hevelius and Riccioli,
authors of the first lunar maps (1647, 1651), and they judged it more
prudent to transfer the names of the terrestrial mountains to the Moon.
The Alps, the Apennines, the Pyrenees, the Carpathians, are all to be
found up there; then, as the vocabulary of the mountains was not
adequate, the scientists reasserted their rights, and we meet in the
Moon, Aristotle, Plato, Hipparchus, Ptolemy, Copernicus, Kepler, Newton,
as well as other more modern and even contemporaneous celebrities.

We have not space to reproduce the general chart of the Moon (that
published by the author measures not less than a meter, with the
nomenclature); but the figure subjoined gives a summary sufficient for
the limits of this little book. Here are the names of the principal
lunar mountains, with the numbers corresponding to them upon the map.

[Illustration: FIG. 71.--Map of the Moon.

(From Fowler's "Telescopic Astronomy.")

           1 Furnerius
           2 Petavius
           3 Langrenus
           4 Macrobius
           5 Cleomedes
           6 Endymion
           7 Altas
           8 Hercules
           9 Romer
          10 Posidonius
          11 Fracastorius
          12 Theophilus
          13 Piccolomini
          14 Albategnius
          15 Hipparchus
          16 Manilius
          17 Eudoxus
          18 Aristotle
          19 Cassini
          20 Aristillus
          21 Plato
          22 Archimedes
          23 Eratosthenes
          24 Copernicus
          25 Ptolemy
          26 Alphonsus
          27 Arzachel
          28 Walter
          29 Clavius
          30 Tycho
          31 Bullialdus
          32 Schiller
          33 Schickard
          34 Gassendi
          35 Kepler
          36 Grimaldi
          37 Aristarchus

          A Mare Crisum
          B Mare Fercunditatis
          C Mare Nectaris
          D Mare Tranquilitatis
          E Mare Serenitatis
          F Mare Imbrium
          G Sinus Iridum
          H Oceanus Procellarum
          I Mare Humorum
          K Mare Nubium
          V Altai Mountains
          W Mare Vaporum
          X Apennine Mountains
          Y Caucasus Mountains
          Z Alps]

The constantly growing progress of optics leads to perpetual new
discoveries in science, and at the present time we can say that we know
the geography of the Moon as well as, and even better than, that of our
own planet. The heights of all the mountains of the Moon are measured to
within a few feet. (One cannot say as much for the mountains of the
Earth.) The highest are over 7000 meters (nearly 25000 feet).
Relatively to its proportions, the satellite is much more mountainous
than the planet, and the plutonian giants are much more numerous there
than here. If we have peaks, like the Gaorisankar, the highest of the
Himalayas and of the whole Earth, whose elevation of 8,840 meters
(29000 feet) is equivalent to 1/1140 the diameter of our globe, there
are peaks on the Moon of 7,700 meters (25,264 feet), _e.g._, those of
Doerfel and Leibniz, the height of which is equivalent to 1/470 the
lunar diameter.

Tycho's Mountain is one of the finest upon our satellite. It is visible
with the naked eye (and perfectly with opera-glasses) as a white point
shining like a kind of star upon the lower portion of the disk. At the
time of full moon it is dazzling, and projects long rays from afar upon
the lunar globe. So, too, Mount Copernicus, whose brilliant whiteness
sparkles in space. But the strangest thing about these lunar mountains
is that they are all hollow, and can be measured as well in depth as in
height. A type of mountain as strange to us as are the seas without
water! In effect, these mountains of the moon are ancient volcanic
craters, with no summits, nor covers.

At the top of the highest peaks, there is a large circular depression,
prolonged into the heart of the mountain, sometimes far below the level
of the surrounding plains, and as these craters often measure several
hundred kilometers, one is obliged, if one does not want to go all round
them in crossing the mountain, to descend almost perpendicularly into
the depths and cross there, to reascend the opposite side, and return to
the plain. These alpine excursions incontestably deserve the name of
perilous ascents!

No country on the Earth can give us any notion of the state of the lunar
soil: never was ground so tormented; never globe so profoundly shattered
to its very bowels. The mountains are accumulations of enormous rocks
tumbled one upon the other, and round the awful labyrinth of craters one
sees nothing but dismantled ramparts, or columns of pointed rocks like
cathedral spires issuing from the chaos.

As we said, there is no atmosphere, or at least so little at the bottom
of the valleys that it is imperceptible. No clouds, no fog, no rain nor
snow. The sky is an eternally black space, vaultless, jeweled with stars
by day as by night.

Let us suppose that we arrive among these savage steppes at daybreak:
the lunar day is fifteen times longer than our own, because the Sun
takes a month to illuminate the entire circuit of the Moon; there are no
less than 354 hours from the rising to the setting of the Sun. If we
arrive before the sunrise, there is no aurora to herald it, for in the
absence of atmosphere there can be no sort of twilight. Of a sudden on
the dark horizon come flashes of the solar light, striking the summits
of the mountains, while the plains and valleys are still in darkness.
The light spreads slowly, for while on the Earth in central latitudes
the Sun takes only two minutes and a quarter to rise, on the Moon it
takes nearly an hour, and in consequence the light it sends out is very
weak for some minutes, and increases excessively slowly. It is a kind of
aurora, but lasts a very short time, for when at the end of half an
hour, the solar disk has half risen, the light appears as intense to the
eye as when it is entirely above the horizon; the radiant orb is seen
with its protuberances and its burning atmosphere. It rises slowly, like
a luminous god, in the depths of the black sky, a profound and formless
sky in which the stars shine all day, since they are not hidden by any
atmospheric veil such as conceals them from us during the daylight.

[Illustration: FIG. 72.--The Lunar Apennines.]

The absence of sensible atmosphere must produce an effect on the
temperature of the Moon analogous to that perceived on the high
mountains of our globe, where the rarefaction of the air does not permit
the solar heat to concentrate itself upon the surface of the soil, as it
does below the atmosphere, which acts as a forcing-house: the Sun's heat
is not kept in by anything, and incessantly radiates out toward space.
In all probability the cold is extremely and constantly rigorous, not
only during the nights, which are fifteen times longer than our own, but
even during the long days of sunshine.

We give two different drawings to represent these curious aspects of
lunar topography. The first (Fig. 72) is taken in the neighborhood of
the Apennines, and shows a long chain of mountains beneath which are
three deep rings, Archimedes, Aristillus, and Autolycus: the second
(Fig. 73) depicts the lunar ring of Flammarion,[14] whose outline is
constructed of dismantled ramparts, and whose depths are sprinkled with
little craters. The first of these two drawings was made in England by
Nasmyth, the second in Germany by Krieger: they both give an exact idea
of what one sees in the telescope with different modes of solar
illumination.

In the Moon's always black and starry sky a majestic star that is not
visible from the Earth, and exhibits this peculiarity that it is
stationary in the Heavens, while all the others pass behind it, may
constantly be admired, by day as well as by night; and it is also of
considerable apparent magnitude. This orb, some four times as large as
the Moon in diameter, and thirteen to fourteen times more extensive in
surface, is our Earth, which presents to the Moon a sequence of phases
similar to those which our satellite presents to us, but in the inverse
direction. At the moment of New Moon, the Sun fully illuminates the
terrestrial hemisphere turned toward our satellite, and we get "Full
Earth"; at the time of Full Moon, on the contrary, the non-illuminated
hemisphere of the Earth is turned toward the satellite, and we get "New
Earth": when the Moon shows us first quarter, the Earth is in last
quarter, and so on. The drawing subjoined gives an idea of these
aspects.

[Illustration: FIG. 73.--Flammarion's Lunar Ring.]

What a curious sight our globe must be during this long night of
fourteen times twenty-four hours! Independent of its phases, which bring
it from first quarter to full earth for the middle of the night, and
from full earth to last quarter for sunrise, how interested we should be
to see it thus stationary in the sky, and turning on itself in
twenty-four hours.

[Illustration: FIG. 74.--Lunar landscape with the Earth in the sky.]

Yes, thanks to us, the inhabitants of the lunar hemisphere turned toward
us are gratified by the sight of a splendid nocturnal torch, doubtless
less white than our own despite the clouds with which the terrestrial
globe is studded, and shaded in a tender tone of bluish emerald-green.
The royal orb of their long nights, the Earth, gives them moonlight of
unparalleled beauty, and we may say without false modesty that our
presence in the lunar sky must produce marvelous and absolutely
fairy-like effects.

Maybe, they envy us our globe, a dazzling dwelling-place whose splendor
radiates through space; they see its greenish clarity varying with the
extent of cloud that veils its seas and continents, and they observe its
motion of rotation, by which all the countries of our planet are
revealed in succession to its admirers.

We are talking of these pageants seen from the Moon, and of the
inhabitants of our satellite as if they really existed. The sterile and
desolate aspect of the lunar world, however, rather brings us to the
conclusion that such inhabitants are non-existent, although we have no
authorization for affirming this. That they have existed seems to me
beyond doubt. The lunar volcanoes had a considerable activity, in an
atmosphere that allowed the white volcanic ashes to be carried a long
way by the winds, figuring round the craters the stellar rays that are
still so striking. These cinders were spread over the soil, preserving
all its asperities of outline, a little heaped up on the side to which
they were impelled. The magnificent photographs recently made at the
Paris Observatory by MM. Loewy and Puiseux are splendid evidence of
these projections. In this era of planetary activity there were liquids
and gases on the surface of the lunar globe, which appear subsequently
to have been entirely absorbed. Now the teaching of our own planet is
that Nature nowhere remains infertile, and that the production of Life
is a law so general and so imperious that life develops at its own
expense, sooner than abstain from developing. Accordingly, it is
difficult to suppose that the lunar elements can have remained inactive,
when only next door they exhibited such fecundity upon our globe. Yes,
the Moon has been inhabited by beings doubtless very different from
ourselves, and perhaps may still be, although this globe has run through
the phases of its astral life more rapidly than our own, and the
daughter is relatively older than the mother.

The duration of the life of the worlds appears to have been in
proportion with their masses. The Moon cooled and mineralized more
quickly than the Earth. Jupiter is still fluid.

The progress of optics brings us already very close to this neighboring
province. 'Tis a pity we can not get a little nearer!

A telescopic magnification of 2000 puts the Moon at 384000/2000 or 192
kilometers (some 120 miles) from our eye. Practically we can obtain no
more, either from the most powerful instruments, or from photographic
enlargements. Sometimes, exceptionally, enlargements of 3000 can be
used. This = 384000/3000 or 128 kilometers (some 80 miles). Undoubtedly,
this is an admirable result, which does the greatest honor to human
intelligence. But it is still too far to enable us to determine anything
in regard to lunar life.

Any one who likes to be impressed by grand and magnificent sights may
turn even a modest field-glass upon our luminous satellite, at about
first quarter, when the relief of its surface, illuminated obliquely by
the Sun, is at its greatest value. If you examine our neighbor world at
this period, for choice at the hour of sunset, you will be astonished at
its brilliancy and beauty. Its outlines, its laces, and embroideries,
give the image of a jewel of shining silver, translucent, fluid,
palpitating in the ether. Nothing could be more beautiful, nothing
purer, and more celestial, than this lunar globe floating in the silence
of space, and sending back to us as in some fairy dream the solar
illumination that floods it. But yesterday I received the same
impression, watching a great ring half standing out, and following the
progress of the Sun as it mounted the lunar horizon to touch these
silvered peaks. And I reflected that it is indeed inconceivable that
999,999/1000000 of the inhabitants of our planet should pass their
lives without ever having attended to this pageant, nor to any of those
others which the divine Urania scatters so profusely beneath the
wondering gaze of the observers of the Heavens.




CHAPTER X

THE ECLIPSES


Among all the celestial phenomena at which it may be our lot to assist
during our contemplation of the universe, one of the most magnificent
and imposing is undoubtedly that which we are now going to consider.

The hirsute comets, and shooting stars with their graceful flight,
captivate us with a mysterious and sometimes fantastic attraction. We
gladly allow our thoughts, mute questioners of the mysteries of the
firmament, to rest upon the brilliant, golden trail they leave behind
them. These unknown travelers bring a message from eternity; they tell
us the tale of their distant journeys. Children of space, their ethereal
beauty speaks of the immensity of the universe.

The eclipses, on the other hand, are phenomena that touch us more
nearly, and take place in our vicinity.

In treating of them, we remain between the Earth and the Moon, in our
little province, and witness the picturesque effects of the combined
movements of our satellite around us.

Have you ever seen a total eclipse of the Sun?

The sky is absolutely clear: no fraction of cloud shadows the solar
rays. The azure vault of the firmament crowns the Earth with a dome of
dazzling light. The fires of the orb of day shed their beneficent
influence generally upon the world.

Yet, see! The radiance diminishes. The luminous disk of the Sun is
gradually corroded. Another disk, as black as ink, creeps in front of
it, and little by little invades it entirely. The atmosphere takes on a
wan, sepulchral hue; astonished nature is hushed in profound silence; an
immense veil of sadness spreads over the world. Night comes on suddenly,
and the stars shine out in the Heavens. It seems as though by some
mysterious cataclysm the Sun had disappeared forever. But this
tribulation is soon over. The divine orb is not extinct. A flaming jet
emerges from the shadow, announcing his return, and when he reappears we
see that he has lost nothing in splendor or beauty. He is still the
radiant Apollo, King of Day, watching over the life of the planetary
worlds.

This sudden night, darkening the Heavens in the midst of a fine day, can
not fail to produce a vivid impression upon the spectators of the superb
phenomenon.

The eclipse lasts only for a few moments, but long enough to make a deep
impression upon our minds, and indeed to inspire anxious spirits with
terror and agitation--even at this epoch, when we know that there is
nothing supernatural or formidable about it.

In former days, Humanity would have trembled, in uneasy consternation.
Was it a judgment from Heaven? Must it not be the work of some invisible
hand throwing the somber veil of night over the celestial torch?

Had not the Earth strayed off her appointed path, and were we not all to
be deprived eternally of the light of our good Sun? Was some monstrous
dragon perhaps preparing to devour the orb of day?

The fable of the dragon devouring the Sun or Moon during the eclipses is
universal in Asia as in Africa, and still finds acceptance under more
than one latitude. But our readers already know that we may identify the
terrible celestial dragon with our gentle friend the Moon, who would not
be greatly flattered by the comparison.

We saw in the preceding lesson that the Moon revolves round us,
describing an almost circular orbit that she travels over in about a
month. In consequence of this motion, the nocturnal orb is sometimes
between the Sun and the Earth, sometimes behind us, sometimes at a right
angle in relation to the Sun and the Earth. Now, the eclipses of the Sun
occur invariably at the time of New Moon, when our satellite passes
between the Sun and ourselves, and the eclipses of the Moon, at the
moment of Full Moon, when the latter is opposite to the Sun, and behind
us.

This fact soon enabled the astronomers of antiquity to discover the
causes to which eclipses are due.

The Moon, passing at the beginning of its revolution between the Sun and
the Earth, may conceal a greater or lesser portion of the orb of day. In
this case there is an eclipse of the Sun. On the other hand, when it is
on the other side of the Earth in relation to the Sun, at the moment of
Full Moon, our planet may intercept the solar rays, and prevent them
from reaching our satellite. The Moon is plunged into _the shadow of the
Earth_, and is then eclipsed. Such is the very simple explanation of the
phenomenon. But why is there not an eclipse of the Sun at each New Moon,
and an eclipse of the Moon at each Full Moon?

If the Moon revolved round us in the same plane as the Earth round the
Sun, it would eclipse the Sun at each New Moon, and would be itself
eclipsed in our shadow at each Full Moon. But the plane of the lunar
orbit dips a little upon the plane of the terrestrial orbit, and the
eclipses can only be produced when the New Moon or the Full Moon occur
at the line of intersection of these two planes, _i.e._, when the Sun,
the Moon, and the Earth are upon the same straight line. In the majority
of cases, instead of interposing itself directly in front of the
sovereign of our system, our satellite passes a little above or a little
below him, just as its passage behind us is nearly always effected a
little above or below the cone of shadow that accompanies our planet,
opposite the Sun.

When the Moon intervenes directly in front of the Sun, she arrests the
light of the radiant orb, and conceals a greater or less portion of the
solar disk. The eclipse is partial if the Moon covers only a portion of
the Sun; total if she covers it entirely; annular, if the solar disk is
visible all round the lunar disk, as appears when the Moon, in her
elliptical orbit, is beyond medium distance, toward the apogee.

On the other hand, when the Moon arrives immediately within the cone of
shadow that the Earth projects behind it, it is her turn to be eclipsed.
She no longer receives the rays of the Sun, and this deprivation is the
more marked in that she owes all her brilliancy to the light of the orb
of day. The Moon's obscurity is complete if she is entirely plunged into
the cone of shadow. In this case, the eclipse is total. But if a portion
of her disk emerges from the cone, that part remains illuminated while
the light of the other dies out. In that case there is a partial
eclipse, and the rounded form of the Earth's shadow can be seen
projected upon our satellite, a celestial witness to the spherical
nature of our globe.

Under certain conditions, then, the Moon can deprive us of the luminous
rays of the Sun, by concealing the orb of day, and in other cases is
herself effaced in crossing our shadow. Despite the fables, fears, and
anxieties it has engendered, this phenomenon is perfectly natural: the
Moon is only playing hide-and-seek with us--a very harmless amusement,
as regards the safety of our planet.

But as we said just now, these phenomena formerly had the power of
terrifying ignorant mortals, either when the orb of light and life
seemed on the verge of extinction, or when the beautiful Phoebus was
covered with a veil of crape and woe, or took on a deep coppery hue.

It would take a volume to describe all the notable events which have
been influenced by eclipses, sometimes for good, more often with
disastrous consequences. The recital of these tragic stories would not
be devoid of interest; it would illustrate the possibilities of
ignorance and superstition, and the power man gains from intellectual
culture and scientific study.

Herodotus records that the Scythians, having some grievance against
Cyaxarus, King of the Medes, revenged themselves by serving up the limbs
of one of his children, whom they had murdered, at a banquet as rare
game. The scoundrels who committed this atrocious crime took refuge at
the Court of the King of Lydia, who was ill judged enough to protect
them. War was accordingly declared between the Medes and Lydians, but a
total eclipse of the Sun occurring just when the battle was imminent,
had the happy effect of disarming the combatants, who prudently retired
each to their own country. This eclipse, which seems to have occurred on
May 28, 584 B.C., had been predicted by Thales. The French painter
Rochegrosse has painted a striking picture of the scene (Fig. 75).

In the year 413 B.C. the Athenian General Nicias prepared to return to
Greece after an expedition to Sicily. But, terrified by an eclipse of
the Moon, and fearing the malign influence of the phenomenon, he put off
his departure, and lost the chance of retreat. This superstition cost
him his life. The Greek army was destroyed, and this event marks the
commencement of the decadence of Athens.

In 331 B.C. an eclipse of the Moon disorganized the troops of Alexander,
near Arbela, and the great Macedonian Captain had need of all his
address to reassure his panic-stricken soldiers.

Agathocles, King of Syracuse, blocked by the Carthaginians in the port
of this city, had the good fortune to escape, but was disturbed on the
second day of his flight by the arrival of a total eclipse of the Sun
which alarmed his companions. "What are you afraid of?" said he,
spreading his cloak in front of the Sun. "Are you alarmed at a shadow?"
(This eclipse seems to be that of August 15, 309, rather than that of
March 2, 310.)

[Illustration: FIG. 75.--Battle between the Medes and Lydians arrested
by an Eclipse of the Sun.]

On June 29, 1033, an epoch at which the approaching end of the world
struck terror into all hearts, an annular eclipse of the Sun occurring
about midday frustrated the designs of a band of conspirators who
intended to strangle the Pope at the altar. This Pope was Benedict IX, a
youth of less than twenty, whose conduct is said to have been anything
but exemplary. The assassins, terrified at the darkening of the Sun,
dared not touch the Pontiff, and he reigned till 1044.[15]

On March 1, 1504, a lunar eclipse saved the life of Christopher
Columbus. He was threatened with death by starvation in Jamaica, where
the contumacious savages refused to give him provisions. Forewarned of
the arrival of this eclipse by the astronomical almanacs, he threatened
to deprive the Caribs of the light of the Moon--and kept his word. The
eclipse had hardly begun when the terrified Indians flung themselves at
his feet, and brought him all that he required.

In all times and among all people we find traces of popular
superstitions connected with eclipses. Here, the abnormal absence of the
Moon's light is regarded as a sign of divine anger: the humble penitents
betake themselves to prayer to ward off the divine anger. There, the
cruelty of the dread dragon is to be averted: he must be chased away by
cries and threats, and the sky is bombarded with shots to deliver the
victim from his monstrous oppressor.

In France the announcement of a solar eclipse for August 21, 1560, so
greatly disturbed our ancestors' peace of mind as to make them idiotic.
Preparations were made for assisting at an alarming phenomenon that
threatened Humanity with deadly consequences! The unhappy eclipse had
been preceded by a multitude of ill omens! Some expected a great
revolution in the provinces and in Rome, others predicted a new
universal deluge, or, on the other hand, the conflagration of the world;
the most optimistic thought the air would be contaminated. To preserve
themselves from so many dangers, and in accordance with the physicians'
orders, numbers of frightened people shut themselves up in tightly
closed and perfumed cellars, where they awaited the decrees of Fate. The
approach of the phenomenon increased the panic, and it is said that one
village _curé_, being unable to hear the confessions of all his flock,
who wanted to discharge their souls of sin before taking flight for a
better world, was fain to tell them "there was no hurry, because the
eclipse had been put off a fortnight on account of the number of
penitents"!

[Illustration: FIG. 76.--Eclipse of the Moon at Laos (February 27,
1877).]

These fears and terrors are still extant among ignorant peoples. In the
night of February 27, 1877, an eclipse of the Moon produced an
indescribable panic among the inhabitants of Laos (Indo-China). In order
to frighten off the Black Dragon, the natives fired shots at the
half-devoured orb, accompanying their volley with the most appalling
yells. Dr. Harmand has memorialized the scene in the lively sketch given
on p. 269.

During the solar eclipse of March 15, 1877, an analogous scene occurred
among the Turks, who for the moment forgot their preparations for war
with Russia, in order to shoot at the Sun, and deliver him from the
toils of the Dragon.

The lunar eclipse of December 16, 1880, was not unnoticed at Tackhent
(Russian Turkestan), where it was received with a terrific din of
saucepans, samovars and various implements struck together again and
again by willing hands that sought to deliver the Moon from the demon
Tchaitan who was devouring her.

In China, eclipses are the object of imposing ceremonies, whose object
is to reestablish the regularity of the celestial motions. Since the
Emperor is regarded as the Son of Heaven, his government must in some
sort be a reflection of the immutable order of the sidereal harmonies.
As eclipses were regarded by astrologers as disturbances of the divine
order, their appearance indicates some irregularity in the government of
the Celestial Empire. Accordingly, they are received with all kinds of
expiatory ceremonies prescribed thousands of years ago, and still in
force to-day.

In the twentieth century, as in the nineteenth, the eighteenth, or in
ancient epochs, the same awe and terror operates upon the ignorant
populations who abound upon the surface of our planet.

To return to astronomical realities.

We said above that these phenomena were produced when the Full Moon and
the New Moon reached the line of intersection, known as the line of
nodes, when the plane of the lunar orbit cuts the plane of the ecliptic.
As this line turns and comes back in the same direction relatively to
the Sun at the end of eighteen years, eleven days, we have only to
register the eclipses observed during this period in order to know all
that will occur in the future, and to find such as happened in the past.
This period was known to the Greeks under the name of the Metonic Cycle,
and the Chaldeans employed it three thousand years ago under the name of
Saros.

On examining this cycle, composed of 223 lunations, we see that there
can not be more than seven eclipses in one year, nor less than two. When
there are only two, they are eclipses of the Sun.

The totality of a solar eclipse can not last more than seven minutes,
fifty-eight seconds at the equator, and six minutes, ten seconds in the
latitude of Paris. The Moon, on the contrary, may be entirely eclipsed
for nearly two hours.

Eclipses of the Sun are very rare for a definite spot. Thus not one
occurred for Paris during the whole of the nineteenth century, the last
which happened exactly above the capital of France having been on May
22, 1724. I have calculated all those for the twentieth century, and
find that two will take place close to Paris, on April 17, 1912, at
eighteen minutes past noon (total for Choisy-le-Roi, Longjumeau, and
Dourdan, but very brief: seven seconds), and August 11, 1999, at 10.28
A.M. (total for Beauvais, Compiègne, Amiens, St. Quentin, fairly long:
two minutes, seventeen seconds). Paris itself will not be favored before
August 12, 2026. In order to witness the phenomenon, one must go and
look for it. This the author did on May 28, 1900, in Spain.

The progress of the lunar shadow upon the surface of the Earth is traced
beforehand on maps that serve to show the favored countries for which
our satellite will dispense her ephemeral night. The above figure shows
the trajectory of the total phase of the 1900 eclipse in Portugal,
Spain, Algeria, and Tunis.

[Illustration: FIG. 77.--The path of the Eclipse of May 28, 1900.]

The immutable splendor of the celestial motions had never struck the
author so impressively as during the observation of this grandiose
phenomenon. With the absolute precision of astronomical calculations,
our satellite, gravitating round the Earth, arrived upon the theoretical
line drawn from the orb of day to our planet, and interposed itself
gradually, slowly, and exactly, in front of it. The eclipse was total,
and occurred at the moment predicted by calculation. Then the obscure
globe of the Moon pursued its regular course, discovered the radiant orb
behind, and gradually and slowly completed its transit in front of him.
Here, to all observers, was a double philosophical lesson, a twofold
impression: that of the greatness, the omnipotence of the inexorable
forces that govern the universe, and that of the inexorable valor of
man, of this thinking atom straying upon another atom, who by the
travail of his feeble intelligence has arrived at the knowledge of the
laws by which he, like the rest of the world, is borne away through
space, through time, and through eternity.

The line of centrality passed through Elche, a picturesque city of
30000 inhabitants, not far from Alicante, and we had chosen this for
our station on account of the probability of fine weather.

From the terrace of the country house of the hospitable Mayor, a farm
transformed into an observatory by our learned friend, Count de la Baume
Pluvinel, there were no obstacles between ourselves and any part of the
sky or landscape. The whole horizon lay before us. In front was a town
of Arab aspect framed in a lovely oasis of palm-trees; a little farther
off, the blue sea beyond the shores of Alicante and Murcia: on the
other side a belt of low mountains, and near us fields and gardens. A
Company of the Civic Guard kept order, and prevented the entrance of too
many curious visitors, of whom over ten thousand had arrived.

At the moment when the first contact of the lunar disk with the solar
disk was observed in the telescope, we fired a gun, in order to announce
the precise commencement of the occultation to the 40000 persons who
were awaiting the phenomenon, and to discover what difference would
exist between this telescopic observation and those made with the
unaided eyes (protected simply by a bit of smoked glass) of so many
improvised spectators. This had already been done by Arago at Perpignan
in 1842. The verification was almost immediate for the majority of eyes,
and may be estimated at eight or ten seconds. So that the commencement
of the eclipse was confirmed almost as promptly for the eye as with the
astronomical instruments.

The sky was splendidly clear; no cloud, no mist, deep blue; blazing Sun.
The first period of the eclipse showed nothing particular. It is only
from the moment when more than half the solar disk is covered by the
lunar disk that the phenomenon is imposing in its grandeur. At this
phase, I called the attention of the people standing in the court to the
visibility of the stars, and indicating the place of Venus in the sky
asked if any with long sight could perceive her. Eight at once
responded in the affirmative. It should be said that the planet was at
that time at its period of maximum brilliancy, when for observers
blessed with good sight, it is always visible to the unaided eye.

When some three-quarters of the Sun were eclipsed, the pigeons which had
flown back to the farm huddled into a corner, and made no further
movement. They told me that evening that the fowls had done the same a
little later, returning to the hen-house as though it had been night,
and that the small children (who were very numerous at Elche, where the
population is certainly not diminishing) left off their games, and came
back to their mothers' skirts. The birds flew anxiously to their nests.
The ants in one garden were excessively agitated, no doubt disconcerted
in their strategics. The bats came out.

A few days before the eclipse I had prepared the inhabitants of this
part of Spain for the observation of the phenomenon by the following
description, which sums up the previous accounts of the astronomers:

"The spectacle of a total eclipse of the Sun is one of the most
magnificent and imposing that it is possible to see in nature. At the
exact moment indicated by calculation, the Moon arrives in front of the
Sun, eats into it gradually, and at last entirely covers it. The light
of the day lessens and is transformed. A sense of oppression is felt by
all nature, the birds are hushed, the dog takes refuge with his master,
the chickens hide beneath their mother's wing, the wind drops, the
temperature falls, an appalling stillness is everywhere perceptible, as
though the universe were on the verge of some imminent catastrophe.
Men's faces assume a cadaverous hue similar to that given at night by
the flame of spirits of wine and salt, a livid funereal light, the
sinister illumination of the world's last hour.

"At the moment when the last line of the solar crescent disappears, we
see, instead of the Sun, a black disk surrounded with a splendid
luminous aureole shooting immense jets into space, with roseate flames
burning at the base.

"A sudden night has fallen on us, a weird, wan night in which the
brightest of the stars are visible in the Heavens. The spectacle is
splendid, grandiose, solemn, and sublime."

This impression was actually felt by us all, as may be seen from the
following notes, written in my schedule of observation during the event,
or immediately after:

"3.50 P.M. Light very weak, sky leaden gray, mountains standing out with
remarkable clearness from the horizon, and seeming to approach us.

"3.55 P.M. Fall of temperature very apparent. Cold wind blowing through
the atmosphere.

"3.56 P.M. Profound silence through nature, which seems to participate
in the celestial phenomenon. Silence in all the groups.

"3.57 P.M. Light considerably diminished, becoming wan, strange, and
sinister. Landscape leaden gray, sea looks black. This diminution of
light is not that of every day after the sunset. There is, as it were, a
tint of sadness spread over the whole of nature. One becomes accustomed
to it, and yet while we know that the occultation of the Sun by the Moon
is a natural phenomenon, we can not escape a certain sense of
uneasiness. The approach of some extraordinary spectacle is imminent."

At this point we examined the effects of the solar light upon the seven
colors of the spectrum. In order to determine as accurately as possible
the tonality of the light of the eclipse, I had prepared seven great
sheets, each painted boldly in the colors of the spectrum, violet,
indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange, red; and a similar series in pieces
of silk. These colors were laid at our feet upon the terrace where my
wife, as well as Countess de la Baume, were watching with me. We then
saw the first four disappear successively and entirely and turn black in
a few seconds, in the following order: violet, indigo, blue, green. The
three other colors were considerably attenuated by the darkness, but
remained visible.

It should be noted that in the normal order of things--that is, every
evening--the contrary appears; violet remains visible after the red.

This experiment shows that the last light emitted by the eclipsed Sun
belongs to the least refrangible rays, to the greatest wave-lengths, to
the slowest vibrations, to the yellow and red rays. Such therefore is
the predominating color of the solar atmosphere.

This experiment completed, we turn back to the Sun. Magical and splendid
spectacle! Totality has commenced, the Sun has disappeared, the black
disk of the Moon covers it entirely, leaving all round it a magnificent
corona of dazzling light. One would suppose it to be an annular eclipse,
with the difference that this can be observed with the naked eye,
without fatigue to the retina, and drawn quietly.

This luminous coronal atmosphere entirely surrounds the solar disk, at a
pretty equal depth, equivalent to about the third of half the solar
diameter. It may be regarded as the Sun's atmosphere.

Beyond this corona is an aureole, of vaster glory but less luminous,
which sends out long plumes, principally in the direction of the
equatorial zone of the Sun, and of the belt of activity of the spots and
prominences.

At the summit of the disk it is conical in shape. Below it is double,
and its right-hand portion ends in a point, not far from Mercury, which
shines like a dazzling star of first magnitude, and seems placed there
expressly to give us the extent and direction of the solar aureole.

I draw these various aspects (which, moreover, change with the movement
of the Moon), and what strikes me most is the distinction in light
between this aureole and the coronal atmosphere; the latter appears to
be a brilliant silvery white, the former is grayer and certainly less
dense.

My impression is that there are _two solar envelopes of entirely
different nature_, the corona belonging to the globe of the Sun, and
forming its atmosphere properly so-called, very luminous; the aureole
formed of particles that circulate independently round it, probably
arising from eruptions, their form as a whole being possibly due to
electric or magnetic forces, counterbalanced by resistances of various
natures. In our own atmosphere the volcanic eruptions are distinct from
the aerial envelope.

The general configuration of this external halo, spreading more
particularly in the equatorial zone, is sufficiently like that of the
eclipse of 1889, published in my _Popular Astronomy_, which also
corresponded with a minimum of solar energy. The year 1900 is in fact
close upon the minimum of the eleven-year period. This equatorial form
is, moreover, what all the astronomers were expecting.

[Illustration: FIG. 78.--Total eclipse of the Sun, May 28, 1900, as
observed from Elche (Spain).]

There can no longer be the slightest doubt that the solar envelope
varies with the activity of the Sun....

"But the total eclipse lasted a much shorter time than I have taken to
write these lines. The seventy-nine seconds of totality are over. A
dazzling light bursts from the Sun, and tells that the Moon pursuing its
orbit has left it. The splendid sight is over. It has gone like a
shadow.

"Already over! It is almost a disillusion. Nothing beautiful lasts in
this world. Too sad! If only the celestial spectacle could have lasted
two, three, or four minutes! It was too short....

"Alas! we are forced to take things as they are.

"The surprise, the oppression, the terror of some, the universal silence
are over. The Sun reappears in his splendor, and the life of nature
resumes its momentarily suspended course.

"While I was making my drawing, M. l'Abbé Moreux, my colleague from the
Astronomical Society of France, who accompanied me to Spain for this
observation, was taking one of his own, without any reciprocal
communication. These two sketches are alike, and confirmatory.

"The differential thermometers that I exposed to the Sun, hanging
freely, and protected from reflection from the ground, were read every
five minutes. The black thermometer went down from 33.1° to 20.7°, that
is 12.4°; the white from 29° to 20.2°--that is, 8.8°. The temperature in
the shade only varied three degrees.

"The light received during totality was due: first, to the luminous
envelope of the Sun; second, to that of the terrestrial atmosphere,
illuminated at forty kilometers (twenty-five miles) on the one side and
the other of the line of centrality. It appeared to be inferior to that
of the Full Moon, on account of the almost sudden transition. But, in
reality, it was more intense, for only first-magnitude stars were
visible in the sky, whereas on a night of full moon, stars of second,
and even of third magnitude are visible. We recognized, among others,
Venus, Mercury, Sirius, Procyon, Capella, Rigel, Betelgeuse."

       *       *       *       *       *

From these notes, taken on the spot, it is evident that the
contemplation of a total eclipse of the Sun is one of the most marvelous
spectacles that can be admired upon our planet.

Some persons assured me that they saw the shadow of the Moon flying
rapidly over the landscape. My attention was otherwise occupied, and I
was unable to verify this interesting observation. The shadow of the
Moon in effect took only eleven minutes (3.47 P.M. to 3.58 P.M.) to
traverse the Iberian Peninsula from Porto to Alicante, _i.e._, a
distance of 766 kilometers (475 miles). It must therefore have passed
over the ground at a velocity of sixty-nine kilometers per minute, or
1,150 meters per second, a speed higher than that of a bullet. It can
easily be watched from afar, on the mountains.

Some weeks previous to this fine eclipse, when I informed the Spaniards
of the belt along which it could be observed, I had invited them to note
all the interesting phenomena they might witness, including the effects
produced by the eclipse upon animals. Birds returned hurriedly to their
nests, swallows lost themselves, sheep huddled into compact packs,
partridges were hypnotized, frogs croaked as if it were night, fowls
took refuge in the hen-house, and cocks crowed, bats came out, and were
surprised by the sun, chicks gathered under their mothers' wing,
cage-birds ceased their songs, some dogs howled, others crept shivering
to their masters' feet, ants returned to the antheap, grasshoppers
chirped as at sunset, pigeons sank to the ground, a swarm of bees went
silently back to their hive, and so on.

These creatures behaved as though the night had come, but there were
also signs of fear, surprise, even of terror, differing only "in degree"
from those manifested during the grandiose phenomenon of a total
eclipse by human beings unenlightened by a scientific education.

At Madrid the eclipse was only partial. The young King of Spain, Alfonso
XIII, took care to photograph it, and I offer the photograph to my
readers (Fig. 79), as this amiable sovereign did me the honor to give it
me a few days after the eclipse.

[Illustration: FIG. 79.--The Eclipse of May 28, 1900, as photographed by
King Alfonso XIII, at Madrid.]

The technical results of these observations of solar eclipses relate
more especially to the elucidation of the grand problem of the physical
constitution of the Sun. We alluded to them in the chapter devoted to
this orb. The last great total eclipses have been of immense value to
science.

The eclipses of the Moon are less important, less interesting, than the
eclipses of the Sun. Yet their aspect must not be neglected on this
account, and it may be said to vary for each eclipse.

Generally speaking, our satellite does not disappear entirely in the
Earth's cone of shadow; the solar rays are refracted round our globe by
our atmosphere, and curving inward, illumine the lunar globe with a rosy
tint that reminds one of the sunset. Sometimes, indeed, this refraction
does not occur, owing doubtless to lack of transparency in the
atmosphere, and the Moon becomes invisible. This happened recently, on
April 11, 1903.

For any spot, eclipses of the Moon are incomparably more frequent than
eclipses of the Sun, because the cone of lunar shadow that produces the
solar eclipses is not very broad at its contact with the surface of the
globe (10, 20, 30, 50, 100 kilometers, according to the distance of the
Moon), whereas all the countries of the Earth for which the Moon is
above the horizon at the hour of the lunar eclipse are able to see it.
It is at all times a remarkable spectacle that uplifts our thoughts to
the Heavens, and I strongly advise my readers on no account to forego
it.




CHAPTER XI

ON METHODS

HOW CELESTIAL DISTANCES ARE DETERMINED, AND HOW THE SUN IS WEIGHED


I will not do my readers the injustice to suppose that they will be
alarmed at the title of this Lesson, and that they do not employ some
"method" in their own lives. I even assume that if they have been good
enough to take me on faith when I have spoken of the distances of the
Sun and Moon, and Stars, or of the weight of bodies at the surface of
Mars, they retain some curiosity as to how the astronomers solve these
problems. Hence it will be as interesting as it is useful to complete
the preceding statements by a brief summary of the methods employed for
acquiring these bold conclusions.

The Sun seems to touch the Earth when it disappears in the purple mists
of twilight: an immense abyss separates us from it. The stars go hand in
hand down the constellated sky; and yet one can not think of their
inconceivable distance without a shiver.

Our neighbor, Moon, floats in space, a stone's throw from us: but
without calculation we should never know the distance, which remains an
impassable desert to us.

The best educated persons sometimes find it difficult to admit that
these distances of Sun and Moon are better determined and more precise
than those of certain points on our minute planet. Hence, it is of
particular moment for us to give an exact account of the means employed
in determining them.

The calculation of these distances is made by "_triangulation_." This
process is the same that surveyors use in the measurement of terrestrial
distances. There is nothing very alarming about it. If the word repels
us a little at first, it is from its appearance only.

When the distance of an object is unknown, the only means of expressing
its apparent size is by measurement of the angle which it subtends
before our eyes.

We all know that an object appears smaller, in proposition with its
distance from us. This diminution is not a matter of chance. It is
geometric, and proportional to the distance. Every object removed to a
distance of 57 times its diameter measures an angle of 1 degree,
whatever its real dimensions. Thus a sphere 1 meter in diameter measures
exactly 1 degree, if we see it at a distance of 57 meters. A statue
measuring 1.80 meters (about 5 ft. 8 in.) will be equal to an angle of 1
degree, if distant 57 times its height, that is to say, at 102.60
meters. A sheet of paper, size 1 decimeter, seen at 5.70 meters,
represents the same magnitude.

In length, a degree is the 57th part of the radius of a circle, _i.e._,
from the circumference to the center.

The measurement of an angle is expressed in parts of the circumference.
Now, what is an angle of a degree? It is the 360th part of any
circumference. On a table 3.60 meters round, an angle of one degree is a
centimeter, seen from the center of the table. Trace on a sheet of paper
a circle 0.360 meters round--an angle of 1 degree is a millimeter.

[Illustration: FIG. 80.--Measurement of Angles.]

If the circumference of a circus measuring 180 meters be divided into
360 places, each measuring 0.50 meters in width, then when the circus is
full a person placed at the center will see each spectator occupying an
angle of 1 degree. The angle does not alter with the distance, and
whether it be measured at 1 meter, 10 meters, 100 kilometers, or in the
infinite spaces of Heaven, it is always the same angle. Whether a degree
be represented by a meter or a kilometer, it always remains a degree. As
angles measuring less than a degree often have to be calculated, this
angle has been subdivided into 60 parts, to which the name of _minutes_
has been given, and each minute into 60 parts or _seconds_. Written
short, the degree is indicated by a little zero (°) placed above the
figure; the minute by an apostrophe ('), and the second by two (").
These minutes and seconds of _arc_ have no relation with the same terms
as employed for the division of the duration of time. These latter ought
never to be written with the signs of abbreviation just indicated,
though journalists nowadays set a somewhat pedantic example, by writing,
_e.g._, for an automobile race, 4h. 18' 30", instead of 4h. 18m. 30s.

This makes clear the distinction between the relative measure of an
angle and the absolute measures, such, for instance, as the meter. Thus,
a degree may be measured on this page, while a second (the 3,600th part
of a degree) measured in the sky may correspond to millions of
kilometers.

Now the measure of the Moon's diameter gives us an angle of a little
more than half a degree. If it were exactly half a degree, we should
know by that that it was 114 times the breadth of its disk away from us.
But it is a little less, since we have more than half a degree (31'),
and the geometric ratio tells us that the distance of our satellite is
110 times its diameter.

Hence we have very simply obtained a first idea of the distance of the
Moon by the measure of its diameter. Nothing could be simpler than this
method. The first step is made. Let us continue.

This approximation tells us nothing as yet of the real distance of the
orb of night. In order to know this distance in miles, we need to know
the width in miles of the lunar disk.

[Illustration: FIG. 81.--Division of the Circumference into 360
degrees.]

This problem has been solved, as follows:

Two observers go as far as possible from each other, and observe the
Moon simultaneously, from two stations situated on the same meridian,
but having a wide difference of latitude. The distance that separates
the two points of observation forms the base of a triangle, of which the
two long sides come together on the Moon.

[Illustration: FIG. 82.--Measurement of the distance of the Moon.]

It is by this proceeding that the distance of our satellite was finally
established, in 1751 and 1752, by two French astronomers, Lalande and
Lacaille; the former observing at Berlin, the latter at the Cape of Good
Hope. The result of their combined observations showed that the angle
formed at the center of the lunar disk by the half-diameter of the Earth
is 57 minutes of arc (a little less than a degree). This is known as the
_parallax_ of the Moon.

Here is a more or less alarming word; yet it is one that we can not
dispense with in discussing the distance of the stars. This astronomical
term will soon become familiar in the course of the present lesson,
where it will frequently recur, and always in connection with the
measurement of celestial distances. "Do not let us fear," wrote Lalande
in his _Astronomie des Dames_, "do not let us fear to use the term
parallax, despite its scientific aspect; it is convenient, and this term
explains a very simple and very familiar effect."

"If one is at the play," he continues, "behind a woman whose hat is too
large, and prevents one from seeing the stage [written a hundred years
ago!], one leans to the left or right, one rises or stoops: all this is
a parallax, a diversity of aspect, in virtue of which the hat appears to
correspond with another part of the theater from that in which are the
actors." "It is thus," he adds, "that there may be an eclipse of the Sun
in Africa and none for us, and that we see the Sun perfectly, because we
are high enough to prevent the Moon's hiding it from us."

See how simple it is. This parallax of 57 minutes proves that the Earth
is removed from the Moon at a distance of about 60 times its
half-diameter (precisely, 60.27). From this to the distance of the Moon
in kilometers is only a step, because it suffices to multiply the
half-diameter of the Earth, which is 6,371 kilometers (3,950 miles) by
this number. The distance of our satellite, accordingly, is 6,371
kilometers, multiplied by 60.27--that is, 384000 kilometers (238000
miles). The parallax of the Moon not only tells us definitely the
distance of our planet, but also permits us to calculate its real volume
by the measure of its apparent volume. As the diameter of the Moon seen
from the Earth subtends an angle of 31', while that of the Earth seen
from the Moon is 114', the real diameter of the orb of night must be to
that of the terrestrial globe in the relation of 273 to 1000. That is a
little more than a quarter, or 3,480 kilometers (2,157 miles), the
diameter of our planet being 12,742 kilometers (7,900 miles).

This distance, calculated thus by geometry, is positively determined
with greater precision than that employed in the ordinary measurements
of terrestrial distances, such as the length of a road, or of a railway.
This statement may seem to be a romance to many, but it is undeniable
that the distance separating the Earth from the Moon is measured with
greater care than, for instance, the length of the road from Paris to
Marseilles, or the weight of a pound of sugar at the grocer's. (And we
may add without comment, that the astronomers are incomparably more
conscientious in their measurements than the most scrupulous
shop-keepers.)

Had we conveyed ourselves to the Moon in order to determine its distance
and its diameter directly, we should have arrived at no greater
precision, and we should, moreover, have had to plan out a journey
which in itself is the most insurmountable of all the problems.

The Moon is at the frontier of our little terrestrial province: one
might say that it traces the limits of our domain in space. And yet, a
distance of 384000 kilometers (238000 miles) separates the planet from
the satellite. This space is insignificant in the immeasurable distances
of Heaven: for the Saturnians (if such exist!) the Earth and the Moon
are confounded in one tiny star; but for the inhabitants of our globe,
the distance is beyond all to which we are accustomed. Let us try,
however, to span it in thought.

A cannon-ball at constant speed of 500 meters (547 yards) per second
would travel 8 days, 5 hours to reach the Moon. A train started at a
speed of one kilometer per minute, would arrive at the end of an
uninterrupted journey in 384000 minutes, or 6,400 hours, or 266 days,
16 hours. And in less than the time it takes to write the name of the
Queen of Night, a telegraphic message would convey our news to the Moon
in one and a quarter seconds.

Long-distance travelers who have been round the world some dozen times
have journeyed a greater distance.

The other stars (beginning with the Sun) are incomparably farther from
us. Yet it has been found possible to determine their distances, and
the same method has been employed.

But it will at once be seen that different measures are required in
calculating the distance of the Sun, 388 times farther from us than the
Moon, for from here to the orb of day is 12000 times the breadth of our
planet. Here we must not think of erecting a triangle with the diameter
of the Earth for its base: the two ideal lines drawn from the
extremities of this diameter would come together between the Earth and
the Sun; there would be no triangle, and the measurement would be
absurd.

In order to measure the distance which separates the Earth from the Sun,
we have recourse to the fine planet Venus, whose orbit is situated
inside the terrestrial orbit. Owing to the combination of the Earth's
motion with that of the Star of the Morning and Evening, the capricious
Venus passes in front of the Sun at the curious intervals of 8 years,
113-1/2 years less 8 years, 8 years, 113-1/2 years plus 8 years.

Thus there was a transit in June, 1761, then another 8 years after, in
June, 1769. The next occurred 113-1/2 years less 8 years, _i.e._,
105-1/2 years after the preceding, in December, 1874; the next in
December, 1882. The next will be in June, 2004, and June, 2012. At these
eagerly anticipated epochs, astronomers watch the transit of Venus
across the Sun at two terrestrial stations as far as possible removed
from each other, marking the two points at which the planet, seen from
their respective stations, appears to be projected at the same moment on
the solar disk. This measure gives the width of an angle formed by two
lines, which starting from two diametrically opposite points of the
Earth, cross upon Venus, and form an identical angle upon the Sun. Venus
is thus at the apex of two equal triangles, the bases of which rest,
respectively, upon the Earth and on the Sun. The measurement of this
angle gives what is called the parallax of the Sun--that is, the angular
dimension at which the Earth would be seen at the distance of the Sun.

[Illustration: FIG. 83.--Measurement of the distance of the Sun.]

Thus, it has been found that the half-diameter of the Earth viewed from
the Sun measures 8.82". Now, we know that an object presenting an angle
of one degree is at a distance of 57 times its length.

The same object, if it subtends an angle of a minute, or the sixtieth
part of a degree, indicates by the measurement of its angle that it is
60 times more distant, _i.e._, 3,438 times.

Finally, an object that measures one second, or the sixtieth part of a
minute, is at a distance of 206,265 times its length.

Hence we find that the Earth is at a distance from the Sun of
206,265/8.82--that is, 23,386 times its half-diameter, that is,
149000000 kilometers (93000000 miles). This measurement again is as
precise and certain as that of the Moon.

I hope my readers will easily grasp this simple method of triangulation,
the result of which indicates to us with absolute certainty the distance
of the two great celestial torches to which we owe the radiant light of
day and the gentle illumination of our nights.

The distance of the Sun has, moreover, been confirmed by other means,
whose results agree perfectly with the preceding. The two principal are
based on the velocity of light. The propagation of light is not
instantaneous, and notwithstanding the extreme rapidity of its
movements, a certain time is required for its transmission from one
point to another. On the Earth, this velocity has been measured as
300000 kilometers (186000 miles) per second. To come from Jupiter to
the Earth, it requires thirty to forty minutes, according to the
distance of the planet. Now, in examining the eclipses of Jupiter's
satellites, it has been discovered that there is a difference of 16
minutes, 34 seconds in the moment of their occurrence, according as
Jupiter is on one side or on the other of the Sun, relatively to the
Earth, at the minimum and maximum distance. If the light takes 16
minutes, 34 seconds to traverse the terrestrial orbit, it must take less
than that time, or 8 minutes, 17 seconds, to come to us from the Sun,
which is situated at the center. Knowing the velocity of light, the
distance of the Sun is easily found by multiplying 300000 by 8 minutes,
17 seconds, or 497 seconds, which gives about 149000000 kilometers
(93000000 miles).

Another method founded upon the velocity of light again gives a
confirmatory result. A familiar example will explain it: Let us imagine
ourselves exposed to a vertical rain; the degree of inclination of our
umbrella will depend on the relation between our speed and that of the
drops of rain. The more quickly we run, the more we need to dip our
umbrella in order not to meet the drops of water. Now the same thing
occurs for light. The stars, disseminated in space, shed floods of light
upon the Heavens. If the Earth were motionless, the luminous rays would
reach us directly. But our planet is spinning, racing, with the utmost
speed, and in our astronomical observations we are forced to follow its
movements, and to incline our telescopes in the direction of its
advance. This phenomenon, known under the name of _aberration_ of light,
is the result of the combined effects of the velocity of light and of
the Earth's motion. It shows that the speed of our globe is equivalent
to 1/10000 that of light, _i.e._, = about 30 kilometers (19 miles) per
second. Our planet accordingly accomplishes her revolution round the Sun
along an orbit which she traverses at a speed of 30 kilometers (better
29-1/2) per second, or 1,770 kilometers per minute, or 106000
kilometers per hour, or 2,592000 kilometers per day, or 946,080000
kilometers (586,569,600 miles) in the year. This is the length of the
elliptical path described by the Earth in her annual translation.

The length of orbit being thus discovered, one can calculate its
diameter, the half of which is exactly the distance of the Sun.

We may cite one last method, whose data, based upon attraction, are
provided by the motions of our satellite. The Moon is a little disturbed
in the regularity of her course round the Earth by the influence of the
powerful Sun. As the attraction varies inversely with the square of the
distance, the distance may be determined by analyzing the effect it has
upon the Moon.

Other means, on which we will not enlarge in this summary of the methods
employed for determinations, confirm the precisions of these
measurements with certainty. Our readers must forgive us for dwelling
at some length upon the distance of the orb of day, since this
measurement is of the highest importance; it serves as the base for the
valuation of all stellar distances, and may be considered as the meter
of the universe.

This radiant Sun to which we owe so much is therefore enthroned in space
at a distance of 149000000 kilometers (93000000 miles) from here.
Its vast brazier must indeed be powerful for its influence to be exerted
upon us to such a manifest extent, it being the very condition of our
existence, and reaching out as far as Neptune, thirty times more remote
than ourselves from the solar focus.

It is on account of its great distance that the Sun appears to us no
larger than the Moon, which is only 384000 kilometers (238000 miles)
from here, and is itself illuminated by the brilliancy of this splendid
orb.

No terrestrial distance admits of our conceiving of this distance. Yet,
if we associate the idea of space with the idea of time, as we have
already done for the Moon, we may attempt to picture this abyss. The
train cited just now would, if started at a speed of a kilometer a
minute, arrive at the Sun after an uninterrupted course of 283 years,
and taking as long to return to the Earth the total would be 566 years.
Fourteen generations of stokers would be employed on this celestial
excursion before the bold travelers could bring back news of the
expedition to us.

Sound is transmitted through the air at a velocity of 340 meters (1,115
feet) per second. If our atmosphere reached to the Sun, the noise of an
explosion sufficiently formidable to be heard here would only reach us
at the end of 13 years, 9 months. But the more rapid carriers, such as
the telegraph, would leap across to the orb of day in 8 minutes, 17
seconds.

Our imagination is confounded before this gulf of 93000000 miles,
across which we see our dazzling Sun, whose burning rays fly rapidly
through space in order to reach us.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now let us see how the distances of the planets were determined.

We will leave aside the method of which we have been speaking; that now
to be employed is quite different, but equally precise in its results.

It is obvious that the revolution of a planet round the Sun will be
longer in proportion as the distance is greater, and the orbit that has
to be traveled vaster. This is simple. But the most curious thing is
that there is a geometric proportion in the relations between the
duration of the revolutions of the planets and their distances. This
proportion was discovered by Kepler, after thirty years of research,
and embodied in the following formula:

"The squares of the times of revolution of the planets round the Sun
(the periodic times) are proportional to the cubes of their mean
distances from the Sun."

This is enough to alarm the boldest reader. And yet, if we unravel this
somewhat incomprehensible phrase, we are struck with its simplicity.

What is a square? We all know this much; it is taught to children of ten
years old. But lest it has slipped your memory: a square is simply a
number multiplied by itself.

Thus: 2 × 2 = 4; 4 is the square of 2.

Four times 4 is 16; 16 is the square of 4.

And so on, indefinitely.

Now, what is a cube? It is no more difficult. It is a number multiplied
twice by itself.

For instance: 2 multiplied by 2 and again by 2 equals 8. So 8 is the
cube of 2. 3 × 3 × 3 = 27; 27 is the cube of 3, and so on.

Now let us take an example that will show the simplicity and precision
of the formula enunciated above. Let us choose a planet, no matter
which. Say, Jupiter, the giant of the worlds. He is the Lord of our
planetary group. This colossal star is five times (precisely, 5.2) as
far from us as the Sun.

Multiply this number twice by itself 5.2 × 5.2 × 5.2 = 140.

On the other hand, the revolution of Jupiter takes almost twelve years
(11.85). This number multiplied by itself also equals 140. The square of
the number 11.85 is equal to the cube of the number 5.2. This very
simple law regulates all the heavenly bodies.

Thus, to find the distance of a planet, it is sufficient to observe the
time of its revolution, then to discover the square of the given number
by multiplying it into itself. The result of the operation gives
simultaneously the cube of the number that represents the distance.

To express this distance in kilometers (or miles), it is sufficient to
multiply it by 149000000 (in miles 93000000), the key to the system
of the world.

Nothing, then, could be less complicated than the definition of these
methods. A few moments of attention reveal to us in their majestic
simplicity the immutable laws that preside over the immense harmony of
the Heavens.

       *       *       *       *       *

But we must not confine ourselves to our own solar province. We have yet
to speak of the stars that reign in infinite space far beyond our
radiant Sun.

Strange and audacious as it may appear, the human mind is able to cross
these heights, to rise on the wings of genius to these distant suns,
and to plumb the depths of the abyss that separates us from these
celestial kingdoms.

Here, we return to our first method, that of triangulation. And the
distance that separates us from the Sun must serve in calculating the
distances of the stars.

The Earth, spinning round the Sun at a distance of 149000000
kilometers (93000000 miles), describes a circumference, or rather an
ellipse, of 936000000 kilometers (580,320000 miles), which it travels
over in a year. The distance of any point of the terrestrial orbit from
the diametrically opposite point which it passes six months later is
298000000 kilometers (184,760000 miles), _i.e._, the diameter of this
orbit. This immense distance (in comparison with those with which we are
familiar) serves as the base of a triangle of which the apex is a star.

The difficulty in exact measurements of the distance of a star consists
in observing the little luminous point persistently for a whole year, to
see if this star is stationary, or if it describes a minute ellipse
reproducing in perspective the annual revolution of the Earth.

If it remains fixed, it is lost in such depths of space that it is
impossible to gage the distance, and our 298000000 kilometers have no
meaning in view of such an abyss. If, on the contrary, it is displaced,
it will in the year describe a minute ellipse, which is only the
reflection, the perspective in miniature, of the revolution of our
planet round the Sun.

The annual parallax of a star is the angle under which one would see the
radius, or half-diameter, of the terrestrial orbit from it. This radius
of 149000000 kilometers (93000000 miles) is indeed, as previously
observed, the unit, the meter of celestial measures. The angle is of
course smaller in proportion as the star is more distant, and the
apparent motion of the star diminishes in the same proportion. But the
stars are all so distant that their annual displacement of perspective
is almost imperceptible, and very exact instruments are required for its
detection.

[Illustration: FIG. 84.--Small apparent ellipses described by the stars
as a result of the annual displacement of the Earth.]

The researches of the astronomers have proved that there is not one star
for which the parallax is equal to that of another. The minuteness of
this angle, and the extraordinary difficulties experienced in measuring
the distance of the stars, will be appreciated from the fact that the
value of a second is so small that the displacement of any star
corresponding with it could be covered by a spider's thread.

A second of arc corresponds to the size of an object at a distance of
206,265 times its diameter; to a millimeter seen at 206 meters'
distance; to a hair, 1/10 of a millimeter in thickness, at 20 meters'
distance (more invisible to the naked eye). And yet this value is in
excess of those actually obtained. In fact:--the apparent displacement
of the nearest star is calculated at 75/100 of a second (0.75"), _i.e._,
from this star, [alpha] of Centaur, the half-diameter of the terrestrial
orbit is reduced to this infinitesimal dimension. Now in order that the
length of any straight line seen from the front be reduced until it
appear to subtend no more than an angle of 0.75", it must be removed to
a distance 275000 times its length. As the radius of the terrestrial
orbit is 149000000 kilometers (93000000 miles), the distance which
separates [alpha] of Centaur from our world must therefore =
41000000000000 kilometers (25000000000000 miles). And that is
the nearest star. We saw in Chapter II that it shines in the southern
hemisphere. The next, and one that can be seen in our latitudes, is 61
of Cygnus, which floats in the Heavens 68000000000000 kilometers
(42000000000000 miles) from here. This little star, of fifth
magnitude, was the first of which the distance was determined (by
Bessel, 1837-1840).

All the rest are much more remote, and the procession is extended to
infinity.

We can not conceive directly of such distances, and in order to imagine
them we must again measure space by time.

In order to cover the distance that separates us from our neighbor,
[alpha] of Centaur, _light_, the most rapid of all couriers, takes 4
years, 128 days. If we would follow it, we must not jump from start to
finish, for that would not give us the faintest idea of the distance: we
must take the trouble to think out the direct advance of the ray of
light, and associate ourselves with its progress. We must see it
traverse 300000 kilometers (186000 miles) during the first second of
the journey; then 300000 more in the second, which makes 600000
kilometers; then once more 300000 kilometers during the third, and so
on without stopping for four years and four months. If we take this
trouble we may realize the value of the figure; otherwise, as this
number surpasses all that we are in the habit of realizing, it will have
no significance for us, and will be a dead letter.

If some appalling explosion occurred in this star, and the sound in its
flight of 340 meters (1,115 feet) per second were able to cross the
void that separates us from it, the noise of this explosion would only
reach us in 3000000 years.

A train started at a speed of 106 kilometers (65 miles) per hour would
have to run for 46000000 years, in order to reach this star, our
neighbor in the celestial kingdom.

The distance of some thirty of the stars has been determined, but the
results are dubious.

The dazzling Sirius reigns 92000000000000 kilometers
(57000000000000 miles), the pale Vega at 204000000000000. Each
of these magnificent stars must be a huge sun to burn at such a distance
with such luminosity. Some are millions of times larger than the Earth.
Most of them are more voluminous than our Sun. On all sides they
scintillate at inaccessible distances, and their light strays a long
while in space before it encounters the Earth. The luminous ray that we
receive to-day from some pale star hardly perceptible to our eyes--so
enormous is its distance--may perhaps bring us the last emanation of a
sun that expired thousands of years ago.

       *       *       *       *       *

If these methods have been clear to my readers, they may also be
interested perhaps in knowing the means employed in weighing the worlds.
The process is as simple and as clear as those of which we have been
speaking.

_Weighing the stars!_ Such a pretension seems Utopian, and one asks
oneself curiously what sort of balance the astronomers must have adopted
in order to calculate the weight of Sun, Moon, planets or stars.

Here, figures replace weights. Ladies proverbially dislike figures: yet
it would be easier for some society dame to weigh the Sun at the point
of her pen, by writing down a few columns of figures with a little care,
than to weigh a 12 kilogram case of fruit, or a dress-basket of 35
kilos, by direct methods.

Weighing the Sun is an amusement like any other, and a change of
occupation.

If the Moon were not attracted by the Earth, she would glide through the
Heavens along an indefinite straight line, escaping at the tangent. But
in virtue of the attraction that governs the movements of all the
Heavenly bodies, our satellite at a distance of 60 times the terrestrial
half-diameter revolves round us in 27 days, 7 hours, 43 minutes, 11-1/2
seconds, continually leaving the straight line to approach the Earth,
and describing an almost circular orbit in space. If at any moment we
trace an arc of the lunar orbit, and if a tangent is taken to this arc,
the deviation from the straight line caused by the attraction of our
planet is found to be 1-1/3 millimeter per second.

This is the quantity by which the Moon drops toward us in each second,
during which she accomplishes 1,017 meters of her orbit.

On the other hand, no body can fall unless it be attracted, drawn by
another body of a more powerful mass.

Beings, animals, objects, adhere to the soil, and weigh upon the Earth,
because they are constantly attracted to it by an irresistible force.

Weight and universal attraction are one and the same force.

On the other hand, it can be determined that if an object is left to
itself upon the surface of the Earth, it drops 4.90 meters during the
first second of its fall.

We also know that attraction diminishes with the square of the distance,
and that if we could raise a stone to the height of the Moon, and then
abandon it to the attraction of our planet, it would in the first second
fall 4.90 meters divided by the square of 60, or 3,600--that is, of
1-1/3 millimeters, exactly the quantity by which the Moon deviates from
the straight line she would pursue if the Earth were not influencing
her.

The reasoning just stated for the Moon is equally applicable to the Sun.

The distance of the Sun is 23,386 times the radius of the Earth. In
order to know how much the intensity of terrestrial weight would be
diminished at such a distance, we should look, in the first place, for
the square of the number representing the distance--that is, 23,386
multiplied by itself, = 546,905000. If we divide 4.90 meters, which
represents the attractive force of our planet, by this number, we get
9/1000000 of a millimeter, and we see that at the distance of the Sun,
the Earth's attraction would really be almost _nil_.

Now let us do for our planet what we did for its satellite. Let us trace
the annual orbit of the terrestrial globe round the central orb, and we
shall find that the Earth falls in each second 2.9 millimeters toward
the Sun.

This proportion gives the attractive force of the Sun in relation to
that of the Earth, and proves that the Sun is 324000 times more
powerful than our world, for 2.9 millimeters divided by 0.000,009 equals
324000, if worked out into the ultimate fractions neglected here for
the sake of simplicity.

A great number of stars have been weighed by the same method.

Their mass is estimated by the movement of a satellite round them, and
it is by this method that we are able to affirm that Jupiter is 310
times heavier than the Earth, Saturn 92 times, Neptune 16 times, Uranus
14 times, while Mars is much less heavy, its weight being only
two-thirds that of our own.

The planets which have no satellites have been weighed by the
perturbations which they cause in other stars, or in the imprudent
comets that sometimes tarry in their vicinity. Mercury weighs very much
less than the Earth (only 6/100) and Venus about 8/10. So the beautiful
star of the evening and morning is not so light as her name might imply,
and there is no great difference between her weight and our own.

As the Moon has no secondary body submitted to her influence, her weight
has been calculated by reckoning the amount of water she attracts at
each tide in the ocean, or by observing the effects of her attraction on
the terrestrial globe. When the Moon is before us, in the last quarter,
she makes us travel faster, whereas in the first quarter, when she is
behind, she delays us.

All the calculations agree in showing us that the orb of night is 81
times less heavy than our planet. There is nearly as much difference in
weight between the Earth and the Moon as between an orange and a grape.

       *       *       *       *       *

Not content with weighing the planets of our system, astronomers have
investigated the weight of the stars. How have they been enabled to
ascertain the quantity of matter which constitutes these distant
Suns--incandescent globes of fire scattered in the depths of space?

They have resorted to the same method, and it is by the study of the
attractive influence of a sun upon some other contiguous neighboring
star, that the weight of a few of these has been calculated.

Of course this method can only be applied to those double stars of which
the distance is known.

It has been discovered that some of the tiny stars that we can hardly
see twinkling in the depths of the azure sky are enormous suns, larger
and heavier than our own, and millions of times more voluminous than the
Earth.

Our planet is only a grain of dust floating in the immensity of Heaven.
Yet this atom of infinity is the cradle of an immense creation
incessantly renewed, and perpetually transformed by the accumulated
centuries.

And what diversity exists in this army of worlds and suns, whose regular
harmonious march obeys a mute order....

But we have as yet said nothing about weight on the surface of the
worlds, and I see signs of impatience in my readers, for after so much
simple if unpoetical demonstration, they will certainly ask me for the
explanation that will prove to them that a kilogram transported to
Jupiter or Mars would weigh more or less than here.

Give me your attention five minutes longer, and I will restore your
faith in the astronomers.

It must not be supposed that objects at the surface of a world like
Jupiter, 310 times heavier than our own, weigh 310 times more. That
would be a serious error. In that case we should have to assume that a
kilogram transported to the surface of the Sun would there weigh 324000
times more, or 324000 kilograms. That would be correct if these orbs
were of the same dimensions as the Earth. But to speak, for instance,
only of the divine Sun, we know that he is 108 times larger than our
little planet.

Now, weight at the surface of a celestial body depends not only on its
mass, but also on its diameter.

In order to know the weight of any body upon the surface of the Sun, we
must argue as follows:

Since a body placed upon the surface of the Sun is 108 times farther
from its center than it is upon a globe of the dimensions of the Earth,
and since, on the other hand, attraction diminishes with the square of
the distance, the intensity of the weight would there be 108 multiplied
by 108, or 11,700 times weaker. Now divide the number representing the
mass, _i.e._, 324000, by this number 11,700, and it results that bodies
at the surface of the Sun are 28 times heavier than here. A woman whose
weight was 60 kilos would weigh 1,680 kilograms there if organized in
the same way as on the Earth, and would find walking very difficult, for
at each step she would lift up a shoe that weighed at least ten
kilograms.

This reasoning as just stated for the Sun may be applied to the other
stars. We know that on the surface of Jupiter the intensity of weight is
twice and a third times as great as here, while on Mars it only equals
37/100.

On the surface of Mercury, weight is nearly twice as small again as
here. On Neptune it is approximately equal to our own.

With deference to the Selenites, everything is at its lightest on the
Moon: a man weighing 70 kilograms on the Earth would not weigh more than
12 kilos there.

So all tastes can be provided for: the only thing to be regretted is
that one can not choose one's planet with the same facility as one's
residence upon the Earth.




CHAPTER XII

LIFE, UNIVERSAL AND ETERNAL


And now, while thanking my readers for having followed me so far in this
descriptive account of the marvels of the Cosmos, I must inquire what
philosophical impression has been produced on their minds by these
celestial excursions to the other worlds? Are you left indifferent to
the pageant of the Heavens? When your imagination was borne away to
these distant stars, suns of the infinite, these innumerable stellar
systems disseminated through a boundless eternity, did you ask what
existed there, what purpose was served by those dazzling spheres, what
effects resulted from these forces, radiations, energies? Did you
reflect that the elements which upon our little Earth determined a vital
activity so prodigious and so varied must needs have spread the waves of
an incomparably vaster and more diversified existence throughout the
immensities of the Universe? Have you felt that all can not be dead and
deserted, as we are tempted by the illusions of our terrestrial senses
and of our isolation to believe in the silence of the night: that on the
contrary, the real aim of Astronomy, instead of ending with statements
of the positions and movements of the stars, is to enable us to
penetrate to them, to make us divine, and know, and appreciate their
physical constitution, their degree of life and intellectuality in the
universal order?

On the Earth, it is Life and Thought that flourish; and it is Life and
Thought that we seek again in these starry constellations strewn to
Infinitude amid the immeasurable fields of Heaven.

The humble little planet that we inhabit presents itself to us as a
brimming cup, overflowing at every outlet. Life is everywhere. From the
bottom of the seas, from the valleys to the mountains, from the
vegetation that carpets the soil, from the mold in the fields and woods,
from the air we breathe, arises an immense, prodigious, and perpetual
murmur. Listen! it is the great voice of Nature, the sum of all the
unknown and mysterious voices that are forever calling to us, from the
ocean waves, from the forest winds, from the 300000 kinds of insects
that are redundant everywhere, and make a lively community on the
surface of our globe. A drop of water contains thousands of curious and
agile creatures. A grain of dust from the streets of Paris is the home
of 130000 bacteria. If we turn over the soil of a garden, field, or
meadow, we find the earthworms working to produce assimilable slime. If
we lift a stone in the path, we discover a crawling population. If we
gather a flower, detach a leaf, we everywhere find little insects living
a parasitic existence. Swarms of midges fly in the sun, the trees of the
wood are peopled with nests, the birds sing, and chase each other at
play, the lizards dart away at our approach, we trample down the
antheaps and the molehills. Life enwraps us in an inexorable
encroachment of which we are at once the heroes and the victims,
perpetuating itself to its own detriment, as imposed upon it by an
eternal reproduction. And this from all time, for the very stones of
which we build our houses are full of fossils so prodigiously multiplied
that one gram of such stone will often contain millions of shells,
marvels of geometrical perfection. The infinitely little is equal to the
infinitely great.

Life appears to us as a fatal law, an imperious force which all obey, as
the result and the aim of the association of atoms. This is illustrated
for us upon the Earth, our only field of direct observation. We must be
blind not to see this spectacle, deaf not to hear its reaching. On what
pretext could one suppose that our little globe which, as we have seen,
has received no privileges from Nature, is the exception; and that the
entire Universe, save for one insignificant isle, is devoted to vacancy,
solitude, and death?

We have a tendency to imagine that Life can not exist under conditions
other than terrestrial, and that the other worlds can only be inhabited
on the condition of being similar to our own. But terrestrial nature
itself demonstrates to us the error of this way of thinking. We die in
the water: fishes die out of the water. Again, short-sighted naturalists
affirm categorically that Life is impossible at the bottom of the sea:
1, because it is in complete darkness; 2, because the terrible pressure
would burst any organism; 3, because all motion would be impossible
there, and so on. Some inquisitive person sends down a dredge, and
brings up lovely creatures, so delicate in structure that the daintiest
touch must proceed with circumspection. There is no light in these
depths: they make it with their own phosphorescence. Other inquirers
visit subterranean caverns, and discover animals and plants whose organs
have been transformed by adaptation to their gloomy environment.

What right have we to say to the vital energy that radiates round every
Sun of the Universe: "Thus far shalt thou come, and no further"? In the
name of Science? An absolute mistake. The Known is an infinitesimal
island in the midst of the vast ocean of the Unknown. The deep seas
which seemed to be a barrier are, as we have seen, peopled with special
life. Some one objects: But after all, there is air there, there is
oxygen: oxygen is indispensable: a world without oxygen would be a
world of death, an eternally sterile desert. Why? Because we have not
yet come across beings that can breathe without air, and live without
oxygen? Another mistake. Even if we did not know of any, it would not
prove that they do not exist. But as it happens, we do know of such: the
_anærobia_. These beings live without air, without oxygen. Better still:
oxygen kills them!

All the evidence goes to show that in interpreting as we ought the
spectacle of terrestrial life, and the positive facts acquired by
Science, we should enlarge the circle of our conceptions and our
judgments, and not limit extra-terrestrial existence to the servile
image of what is in existence here below. Terrestrial organic forms are
due to local causes upon our planet. The chemical constitution of water
and of the atmosphere, temperature, light, density, weight, are so many
elements that have gone to form our bodies. Our flesh is composed of
carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen, and oxygen combined in the state of water,
and of some other elements, among which we may instance sodium chloride
(salt). The flesh of animals is not chemically different from our own.
All this comes from the water and the air, and returns to them again.
The same elements, in very minute quantities, make up all living bodies.
The ox that browses on the grass is formed of the same flesh as the man
who eats the beef. All organized terrestrial matter is only carbon
combined in variable proportions with hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, etc.

But we have no right to forbid Nature to act differently in worlds from
which carbon is absent. A world, for example, in which silica replaces
carbon, silicic acid carbonic acid, might be inhabited by organisms
absolutely different from those which exist on the Earth, different not
only in form, but also in substance. We already know stars and suns for
which spectral analysis reveals a predominance of silica, _e.g._, Rigel
and Deneb. In a world where chlorine predominated, we might expect to
find hydrochloric acid, and all the fecund family of chlorides, playing
an important part in the phenomena of life. Might not bromine be
associated in other formations? Why, indeed, should we draw the line at
terrestrial chemistry? What is to prove that these elements are really
simple? May not hydrogen, carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, and sulphur all be
compounds? Their equivalents are multiples of the first: 1, 6, 8, 14,
16. And is even hydrogen the most simple of the elements? Is not its
molecule composed of atoms, and may there not exist a single species of
primitive atom, whose geometric arrangement and various associations
might constitute the molecules of the so-called simple elements?

In our own solar system we discover the essential differences between
certain planets. In the spectrum of Jupiter, for instance, we are aware
of the action of an unknown substance that manifests itself by a marked
absorption of certain red rays. This gas, which does not exist upon the
Earth, is seen still more obviously in the atmospheres of Saturn and
Uranus. Indeed, upon this last planet the atmosphere appears, apart from
its water vapor, to have no sort of analogy with our own. And in the
solar spectrum itself, many of the lines have not yet been identified
with terrestrial substances.

The interrelation of the planets is of course incontrovertible, since
they are all children of the same parent. But they differ among
themselves, not merely in respect of situation, position, volume, mass,
density, temperature, atmosphere, but again in physical and chemical
constitution. And the point we would now accent is that this diversity
should not be regarded as an obstacle to the manifestations of life,
but, on the contrary, as a new field open to the infinite fecundity of
the universal mother.

When our thoughts take wing, not only to our neighbors, Moon, Venus,
Mars, Jupiter, or Saturn, but still more toward the myriads of unknown
worlds that gravitate round the suns disseminated in space, we have no
plausible reason for imagining that the inhabitants of these other
worlds of Heaven resemble us in any way, whether in form, or even in
organic substance.

The substance of the terrestrial human body is due to the elements of
our planet, and notably to carbon. The terrestrial human form derives
from the ancestral animal forms to which it has gradually raised itself
by the continuous progress of the transformation of species. To us it
seems obvious that we are man or woman, because we have a head, a heart,
lungs, two legs, two arms, and so on. Nothing is less a matter of
course. That we are constituted as we are, is simply the result of our
pro-simian ancestors having also had a head, a heart, lungs, legs, and
arms--less elegant than your own, it is true, Madam, but still of the
same anatomy. And more and more, by the progress of paleontology, we are
delving down to the origin of beings. As certain as it is that the bird
derives from the reptile by a process of organic evolution, so certain
is it that terrestrial Humanity represents the topmost branches of the
huge genealogical tree, whereof all the limbs are brothers, and the
roots of which are plunged into the very rudiments of the most
elementary and primitive organisms.

The multitude of worlds is surely peopled by every imaginable and
unimaginable form. Terrestrial man is endowed with five senses, or
perhaps it is better to say six. Why should Nature stop at this point?
Why, for instance, may she not have given to certain beings an
electrical sense, a magnetic sense, a sense of orientation, an organ
able to perceive the ethereal vibrations of the infra-red or
ultra-violet, or permitted them to hear at a distance, or to see through
walls? We eat and digest like coarse animals, we are slaves to our
digestive tube: may there not be worlds in which a nutritive atmosphere
enables its fortunate inhabitants to dispense with this absurd process?
The least sparrow, even the dusky bat, has an advantage over us in that
it can fly through the air. Think how inferior are our conditions, since
the man of greatest genius, the most exquisite woman, are nailed to the
soil like any vulgar caterpillar before its metamorphosis! Would it be a
disadvantage to inhabit a world in which we might fly whither we would;
a world of scented luxury, full of animated flowers; a world where the
winds would be incapable of exciting a tempest, where several suns of
different colors--the diamond glowing with the ruby, or the emerald with
the sapphire--would burn night and day (azure nights and scarlet days)
in the glory of an eternal spring; with multi-colored moons sleeping in
the mirror of the waters, phosphorescent mountains, aerial
inhabitants,--men, women, or perhaps of other sexes,--perfect in their
forms, gifted with multiple sensibilities, luminous at will,
incombustible as asbestos, perhaps immortal, unless they commit suicide
out of curiosity? Lilliputian atoms as we are, let us once for all be
convinced that our imagination is but sterility, in the midst of an
infinitude hardly glimpsed by the telescope.

One important point seems always to be ignored expressly by those who
blindly deny the doctrine of the plurality of worlds. It is that this
doctrine does not apply more particularly to the present epoch than to
any other. _Our_ time is of no importance, no absolute value. Eternity
is the field of the Eternal Sower. There is no reason why the other
worlds should be inhabited _now_ more than at any other epoch.

What, indeed, is the Present Moment? It is an open trap through which
the Future falls incessantly into the gulf of the Past.

The immensity of Heaven bears in its bosom cradles as well as tombs,
worlds to come and perished worlds. It abounds in extinct suns, and
cemeteries. In all probability Jupiter is not yet inhabited. What does
this prove? The Earth was not inhabited during its primordial period:
what did that prove to the inhabitants of Mars or of the Moon, who were
perhaps observing it at that epoch, a few million years ago?

To pretend that our globe must be the only inhabited world because the
others do not resemble it, is to reason, not like a philosopher, but, as
we remarked before, like a fish. Every rational fish ought to assume
that it is impossible to live out of water, since its outlook and its
philosophy do not extend beyond its daily life. There is no answer to
this order of reasoning, except to advise a little wider perception, and
extension of the too narrow horizon of habitual ideas.

For us the resources of Nature may be considered infinite, and
"positive" science, founded upon our senses only, is altogether
inadequate, although it is the only possible basis of our reasoning. We
must learn to see with the eyes of our spirit.

As to the planetary systems other than our own, we are no longer reduced
to hypotheses. We already know with certainty that our Sun is no
exception, as was suggested, and is still maintained, by some theorists.
The discovery in itself is curious enough.

It is surely an exceptional situation that, given a sidereal system
composed of a central sun, and of one or more stars gravitating round
him, the plane of such a system should fall just within our line of
vision, and that it should revolve in such a way that the globes of
which it is composed pass exactly between this sun and ourselves in
turning round him, eclipsing him more or less during this transit. As,
on the other hand, the eclipses would be our only means of determining
the existence of these unknown planets (save indeed from perturbation,
as in the case of Sirius and Procyon), it might have seemed quixotic to
hope for like conditions in order to discover solar systems other than
our own. But these exceptional circumstances have reproduced themselves
at different parts of the Heavens.

Thus, for instance, we have seen that the variable star Algol owes its
variations in brilliancy, which reduce it from second to fourth
magnitude every sixty-nine hours, to the interposition of a body between
itself and the Earth, and celestial mechanics has already been able to
determine accurately the orbit of this body, its dimensions and its
mass, and even the flattening of the sun Algol. Here, then, is a system
in which we know the sun and an enormous planet, whose revolution is
effected in sixty-nine hours with extreme rapidity, as measured by the
spectroscope.

The star [delta] of Cepheus is in the same case: it is an orb eclipsed
in a period of 129 hours, and its eclipsing planet also revolves in the
plane of our vision. The variable star in Ophiuchus has an analogous
system, and observation has already revealed a great number of others.

Since, then, a certain number of solar systems differing from our own
have been revealed, as it were in section, to terrestrial observation,
this affords us sufficient evidence of the existence of an innumerable
quantity of solar systems scattered through the immensities of space,
and we are no longer reduced to conjecture.

On the other hand, analysis of the motions of several stars, such as
Sirius, Procyon, Altaïr, proves that these distant orbs have
companions,--planets not yet discovered by the telescope, and that
perhaps never will be discovered, because they are obscure, and lost in
the radiation of the star.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some _savants_ have asserted that Life can not germinate if the
conditions of the environment differ too much from terrestrial
conditions.

This hypothesis is purely gratuitous, and we will now discuss it.

In order to examine what is happening on the Earth, let us mount the
ladder of time for a moment, to follow the evolutions of Nature.

There was an epoch when the Earth did not exist. Our planet, the future
world of our habitation, slept in the bosom of the solar nebula.

At last it came to birth, this cherished Earth, a gaseous, luminous
ball, poor reflection of the King of Orbs, its parent. Millions of years
rolled by before the condensation and cooling of this new globe were
sufficiently transformed to permit life to manifest itself in its most
rudimentary aspects.

The first organic forms of the protoplasm, the first aggregations of
cells, the protozoons, the zoophytes or plant-animals, the gelatinous
mussels of the still warm seas, were succeeded by the fishes, then by
the reptiles, the birds, the mammals, and lastly man, who at present
occupies the top of the genealogical tree, and crowns the animal
kingdom.

Humanity is comparatively young upon the Earth. We may attribute some
thousands of centuries of existence to it ... and some five years of
reason!

The terrestrial organisms, from the lowest up to man, are the resultant
of the forces in action at the surface of our planet. The earliest seem
to have been produced by the combinations of carbon with hydrogen and
nitrogen; they were, so to speak, without animation, save for some very
rudimentary sensibility; the sponges, corals, polyps, and medusæ, give
us a notion of these primitive beings. They were formed in the tepid
waters of the primary epoch. As long as there were no continents, no
islands emerging from the level of the universal ocean, there were no
beings breathing in the air. The first aquatic creatures were succeeded
by the amphibia, the reptiles. Later on were developed the mammals and
the birds.

What, again, do we not owe to the plant-world of the primary epoch, of
the secondary epoch, of the tertiary epoch, which slowly prepared the
good nutritious soil of to-day, in which the roses flourish, and the
peach and strawberry ripen?

Before it gave birth to a Helen or a Cleopatra, life manifested itself
under the roughest forms, and in the most varied conditions. A
long-period comet passing in sight of the Earth from time to time would
have seen modifications of existence in each of its transits, in
accordance with a slow evolution, corresponding to the variation of the
conditions of existence, and progressing incessantly, for if Life is the
goal of nature, Progress is the supreme law.

The history of our planet is the history of life, with all its
metamorphoses. It is the same for all the worlds, with some exceptions
of orbs arrested in their development.

The constitution of living beings is in absolute relation with the
substances of which they are composed, the environment in which they
move, temperature, light, weight, density, the length of day and night,
the seasons, etc.--in a word, with all the cosmographic elements of a
world.

If, for example, we compare between themselves two worlds such as the
Earth and Neptune, utterly different from the point of view of distance
from the Sun, we could not for an instant suppose that organic
structures could have followed a parallel development on these planets.
The average temperature must be much lower on Neptune than on the Earth,
and the same holds for intensity of light. The years and seasons there
are 165 times longer than with us, the density of matter is three times
as weak, and weight is, on the contrary, a little greater. Under
conditions so different from our own, the activities of Nature would
have to translate themselves under other forms. And doubtless the
elementary bodies would not be found there in the same proportions.
Consequently we have to conclude that organs and senses would not be the
same there as here. The optic nerve, for instance, which has formed and
developed here from the rudimentary organ of the trilobite to the
marvels of the human eye, must be incomparably more sensitive upon
Neptune than in our dazzling solar luminosity, in order to perceive
radiations that we do not perceive here. In all probability, it is
replaced there by some other organ. The lungs, functioning there in
another atmosphere, are different from our own. So, too, for the stomach
and digestive organs. Corporeal forms, animal and human, can not
resemble those which exist upon the Earth.

Certain _savants_ contend that if the conditions differed too much from
terrestrial conditions, life could not be produced there at all. Yet we
have no right to limit the powers of Nature to the narrow bounds of our
sphere of observation, and to pretend that our planet and our Humanity
are the type of all the worlds. That is a hypothesis as ridiculous as it
is childish.

Do not let us be "personal," like children, and old people who never see
beyond their room. Let us learn to live in the Infinite and the Eternal.

From this larger point of view, the doctrine of the plurality of worlds
is the complement and the natural crown of Astronomy. What interests us
most in the study of the Universe is surely to know what goes on there.

       *       *       *       *       *

These considerations show that, in all the ages, what really constitutes
a planet is not its skeleton but the life that vibrates upon its
surface.

And again, if we analyze things, we see that for the Procession of
Nature, life is all, and matter nothing.

What has become of our ancestors, the millions of human beings who
preceded us upon this globe? Where are their bodies? What is left of
them? Search everywhere. Nothing is left but the molecules of air,
water, dust, atoms of hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, carbon, etc., which
are incorporated in turn in the organism of every living being.

The whole Earth is a vast cemetery, and its finest cities are rooted in
the catacombs. But now, in crossing Paris, I passed for at least the
thousandth time near the Church of St. Germain-l'Auxerrois, and was
obliged to turn out of the direct way, on account of excavations. I
looked down, and saw that immediately below the pavement, they had just
uncovered some stone coffins still containing the skeletons that had
reposed there for ten centuries. From time immemorial the passers-by had
trampled them unwittingly under foot. And I reflected that it is much
the same in every quarter of Paris. Only yesterday, some Roman tombs and
a coin with the effigy of Nero were found in a garden near the
Observatory.

And from the most general standpoint of Life, the whole world is in the
same case, and even more so, seeing that all that exists, all that
lives, is formed of elements that have already been incorporated in
other beings, no longer living. The roses that adorn the bosom of the
fair ... but I will not enlarge upon this topic.

And you, so strong and virile, of what elements is your splendid body
formed? Where have the elements you absorb to-day in respiration and
assimilation been drawn from, what lugubrious adventures have they been
subject to? Think away from it: do not insist on this point: on no
account consider it....

And yet, let us dwell on it, since this reality is the most evident
demonstration of the ideal; since what exists is you, is all of us, is
_Life_; and matter is only its substance, like the materials of a house,
and even less so, since its particles only pass rapidly through the
framework of our bodies. A heap of stones does not make a house.
Quintillions of tons of materials would not represent the Earth or any
other world.

Yes, what really exists, what constitutes a complete orb, is the city of
Life. Let us recognize that the flower of life flourishes on the surface
of our planet, embellishing it with its perfume; that it is just this
life that we see and admire,--of which we form part,--and which is the
_raison d'être_ of things; that matter floats, and crosses, and crosses
back again, in the web of living beings,--and the reality, the goal, is
not matter--it is the life matter is employed upon.

Yes, matter passes, and being also, after sharing in the concerted
symphony of life.

And indeed everything passes rapidly!

What irrepressible grief, what deep melancholy, what ineffaceable
regrets we feel, when as age comes on we look back, when we see our
friends fallen upon the road one after the other, above all when we
visit the beloved scenes of our childhood, those homes of other years,
that witnessed our first start in terrestrial existence, our first
games, our first affections--those affections of childhood that seemed
eternal--when we wander over those fields and valleys and hills, when
we see again the landscape whose aspect has hardly changed, and whose
image is so intimately linked with our first impressions. There near
this fireside the grandfather danced us on his knee, and told us
blood-curdling stories; here the kind grandmother came to see if we were
comfortably tucked in, and not likely to fall out of the big bed; in
this little wood, along these alleys that seemed endless, we spread our
nets for birds; in this stream we fished for crayfish; there on the path
we played at soldiers with our elders, who were always captains; on
these slopes we found rare stones and fossils, and mysterious
petrifactions; on this hill we admired the fine sunsets, the appearance
of the stars, the form of the constellations. There we began to live, to
think, to love, to form attachments, to dream, to question every
problem, to breathe intellectually and physically. And now, where is
this beloved grandfather? the good grandmother? where are all whom we
knew in infancy? where are our dreams of childhood? Winged thoughts
still seem to flutter in the air, and that is all. People, caresses,
voices, all have gone and vanished. The cemetery has closed over them
all. There is a silent void. Were all those fine and sunny hours an
illusion? Was it only to weep one day over this negation that our
childish hearts were so tenderly attached to these fleeting shadows? Is
there nothing, down the long length of human history, but eternal
delusion?

It is here, above all, that we find ourselves in presence of the
greatest problems. Life is the goal, it is Life that produces the
conditions of Thought. Without Thought, where would be the Universe?

We feel that without life and thought, the Universe would be an empty
theater, and Astronomy itself, sublime science, a vain research. We feel
that this is the truth, veiled as yet to actual science, and that human
races kindred with our own exist there in the immensities of space. Yes,
we _feel_ that this is truth.

But we would fain go a little further in our knowledge of the universe,
and penetrate in some measure the secret of our destinies. We would know
if these distant and unknown Humanities are not attached to us by
mysterious cords, if our life, which will assuredly be extinguished at
some definite moment here below, will not be prolonged into the regions
of Eternity.

A moment ago we said that nothing is left of the body. Millions of
organisms have lived, there are no remains of them. Air, water, smoke,
dust. _Memento, homo, quia pulvis es et in pulverem revertebis._
Remember oh man! that dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt return,
says the priest to the faithful, when he scatters the ashes on the day
after the carnival.

The body disappears entirely. It goes where the corpse of Cæsar went an
hour after the extinction of his pyre. Nor will there be more remains of
any of us. And the whole of Humanity, and the Earth itself, will also
disappear one day. Let no one talk of the Progress of Humanity as an
end! That would be too gross a decoy.

If the soul were also to disappear in smoke, what would be left of the
vital and intellectual organization of the world? Nothing.

On this hypothesis, _all_ would be reduced to _nothing_.

Our reason is not immense, our terrestrial faculties are sufficiently
limited, but this reason and these faculties suffice none the less to
make us feel the improbability, the absurdity, of this hypothesis, and
we reject it as incompatible with the sublime grandeur of the spectacle
of the universe.

Undoubtedly, Creation does not seem to concern itself with us. It
proceeds on its inexorable course without consulting our sensations.
With the poet we regret the implacable serenity of Nature, opposing the
irony of its smiling splendor to our mourning, our revolts, and our
despair.

          Que peu de temps suffit pour changer toutes choses!
            Nature au front serein, comme vous oubliez!
          Et comme vous brisez dans vos métamorphoses
            Les fils mystérieux où nos coeurs sont liés.

          D'autres vont maintenant passer où nous passâmes;
            Nous y sommes venus, d'autres vont y venir,
          Et le songe qu'avaient ébauché nos deux âmes,
            Ils le continueront sans pouvoir le finir.

          Car personne ici-bas ne termine et n'acheve;
            Les pires des humains sont comme les meilleurs;
          Nous nous éveillons tous au même endroit du rêve:
            Tout commence en ce monde et tout finit ailleurs.

          Répondez, vallon pur, répondez, solitude!
            O Nature, abritée en ce désert si beau,
          Quand nous serons couchés tous deux, dans l'attitude
            Que donne aux morts pensifs la forme du tombeau,

          Est-ce que vous serez à ce point insensible,
            De nous savoir perdus, morts avec nos amours,
          Et de continuer votre fête paisible
            Et de toujours sourire et de chanter toujours?[16]

_Note.--Free Translation._

     How brief a time suffices for all things to change! Serene-fronted
     Nature, too soon you will forget!... in your metamorphoses
     ruthlessly snapping the cords that bind our hearts together!

     Others will pass where we pass; we have arrived, and others will
     arrive after us: the thought sketched out by our souls will be
     pursued by theirs ... and they will not find the solution of it.

     For no one here begins or finishes: the worst are as the best of
     humans; we all awake at the same moment of the dream: we all begin
     in this world, and end otherwhere.

     Reply, sweet valley, reply, solitude; O Nature, sheltering in this
     splendid desert, when we are both asleep, and cast by the tomb into
     the attitude of pensive death.

     Will you to the last verge be so insensible, that, knowing us lost,
     and dead with our loves, you will pursue your cheerful feast, and
     smile, and sing always?

Yes, mortals may say that when they are sleeping in the grave, spring
and summer will still smile and sing; husband and wife may ask
themselves if they will meet again some day, in another sphere; but do
we not _feel_ that our destinies can not be terminated here, and that
short of absolute and final nonentity for everything, they must be
renewed beyond, in that starry Heaven to which every dream has flown
instinctively since the first origins of Humanity?

As our planet is only a province of the Infinite Heavens, so our actual
existence is only a stage in Eternal Life. Astronomy, by giving us
wings, conducts us to the sanctuary of truth. The specter of death has
departed from our Heaven. The beams of every star shed a ray of hope
into our hearts. On each sphere Nature chants the pæan of Life Eternal.

  THE END




INDEX


  A

  Aberration, 300

  Adams, 168

  Agnesi, Marie, 5

  Alcar, 34

  Aldebaran, 44, 66

  Alexandria, 3

  Algol, 39

  Ancients, views of, 30

  Andrew Ellicot, 195

  Andromeda, 37, 38

  Angles, 289

  Antares, 45, 66, 70

  Antipodes, 208

  Arago, 275

  Arcturus, 39, 66

  Asteroids, 146, 195

  Astronomie des Dames, 9

  Attraction, 208

  Aureole, 279

  Autumn Constellations, 54

  Axis, 225


  B

  Babylonian Tables, 30

  Bartholomew Diaz, 176

  Bear, Little, 35
    Great, 32, 34, 35

  Betelgeuse, 49, 66

  Biela's Comet, 189, 198

  Bode's law, 167

  Bolides, 201


  C

  Cancer, 72

  Capella, 38, 66

  Cassiopeia, 36

  Castor, 44, 68

  Catalogue of Lalande, 65

  Catharine of Alexandria, 3

  Centaur, 52, 64, 65, 80

  Ceres, 147

  Chaldean pastors, 30

  Chaldeans, 271

  Chariot of David, 32

  Charioteer, 38

  Chart of Mars, 140

  Châtelet, Marquise du, 4

  Chiron, The Centaur, 30, 51

  Chromosphere, 102

  Clairaut, 3

  Clerke, Agnes, 7

  Cnidus, 31

  Coggia's Comet, 187

  Comet of Biela, 197
    of 1811, 186
    of 1858, 174

  Comets, 111, 185

  Constellations, 28
    figures of, 31
    Autumn, 54

  Constellations, Spring, 52
    Summer, 53
    Winter, 51

  Copernicus, 125

  Corona Borealis, 40

  Corona of the Sun, 104

  Cygnus, 40


  D

  de Blocqueville, Madame, 5

  de Breteuil, Gabrielle-Émilie, 4

  de Charrière, Madame, 5

  Deneb, 41

  des Brosses, 5

  Diaz, Bartholomew, 176

  Dipper, 32, 34

  Donati, 187

  Double star, stellar dial of, 86

  Double stars, 68, 70

  Dragon, 36

  du Châtelet, Marquise, 4


  E

  Eagle, 41

  Earth, 205
    ancient notions of, 19
    distance from the sun, 215
    how sustained, 21
    inclination, 224
    in space, 20
    motion of, round the Sun, 222
    movement of, 217
    rotundity of, 206
    viewed from Mars, 144
    viewed from Mercury, 119
    viewed from Venus, 130
    weight, 210

  Eclipse of Sun, May, 1900, 273

  Eclipses, 259

  Ellicot, Andrew, 195

  Entretiens sur la Pluralité des mondes, 9

  Equator, 225

  Eudoxus, 31

  Evening Star, 123


  F

  Faculæ, 98, 100

  Fire-balls, 198

  Flammarion's Lunar Ring, 253

  Fleming, Mrs., 7

  Fontenelle, 9

  Foucault, 219


  G

  Galileo, 95, 98, 125, 244

  Galle, 168

  Globe, divisions of, 226

  Great Bear, 32, 34, 35

  Great Dog, 50

  Grecian Calendar, 229

  Greek alphabet, 33


  H

  Hall, Mr., 143

  Halley, 181

  Halley's Comet, 3, 175

  Heavens, map of, 61

  Hercules, 41, 66, 79

  Herdsman, 39

  Herschel, Caroline, 6

  Hevelius, 246

  Hipparchus, 31

  Houses of the Sun, 43

  Huggins, Lady, 8

  Huyghens, 49

  Hyades, 44

  Hypatia, 3


  J

  Janssen, 102

  Jupiter, 148
    satellites, 155
    telescopic aspect of, 150


  K

  Klumpke, Miss, 7

  Kovalevsky, Sophie, 6


  L

  Lacaille, 292

  Lalande, 3, 9, 65, 292

  Latitudes, 226

  Leonids, 195

  Lepaute, Madame Hortense, 3, 4

  Le Verrier, 167

  Little Bear, 35

  Little Dog, 50

  Lockyer, 102

  Longitudes, 226

  Lucifer, 122

  Lunar Apennines, 251
    landscape, 254
    topography, 252

  Lyre, 40


  M

  Mars, 131
    chart of, 140

  Measurement, 289

  Medes and Lydians, 266

  Mercury, 114

  Meteorites, 201

  Meteors, 190, 191

  Metonic Cycle, 271

  Milky Way, 78, 87

  Mira Ceti, 77

  Mitchell, Maria, 7

  Mizar, 34, 69

  Moon, 232
    diameter of, 242
    distance of, 292
    geological features of, 245
    map of, 247
    mountains of, 246
    phases of, 241
    photograph of, 240
    revolution of, 234
    rotation of, 242
    size of, 242
    temperature of, 250
    total eclipse of, 263


  N

  Nebula, in Andromeda, 81
    in Orion, 81
    in the Greyhounds, 82

  Neptune, 65, 166
    revolution of, 169

  Newton, 181

  Nucleus, 95, 185


  O

  Orion, 48, 49, 81


  P

  Parallax, 292, 293
    annual, 306

  Pearl, 40

  Pegasus, 38

  Penumbra, 96

  Periodic Comet, orbit of, 182

  Perseids, 195

  Perseus, 38, 70, 78

  Phenician navigators, 30

  Phoebus, 67

  Photosphere, 101

  Piazzi, 147

  Planets, 109, 113, 146
    distances, 110, 302
    orbits of, 115
    orbits of, 116

  Pleiades, 38, 39, 44, 83
    occultation of, 85

  Pleione, 84

  Polaris, 63

  Pole-star, 34, 63

  Poles, 225

  Pollux, 44

  Pope Calixtus, 176

  Prodigies in the heavens, 178

  Ptolemy, 31, 217


  R

  Radiant, 195

  Riccioli, 246

  Rigel, 49, 70

  Roberts, Mrs. Isaac, 7


  S

  Saidak, 34

  Saros, 271

  Satellites, 110

  Saturn, 156
    revolution of, 157
    satellites, 162, 165
    volume, 158

  Saturn's rings, 161

  Scarpellini, Madame, 7

  Scheiner, 95

  Schiaparelli, 139

  Secchi, Father, 7

  Seven Oxen, 32

  Sextuple star, 74

  Shepherd's Star, 11

  Shooting stars, 193, 194, 196

  Sirius, 66, 309

  _Solar storms_, 100
    flames, 105
    system, 65

  Somerville, Mrs., 6

  Spring constellations, 52

  Stars, distances, 62
    double, 68, 70
    first magnitude, 57
    number of, 60
    quadruple, 73
    second magnitude, 58
    shooting, 193, 194
    temporary, 77

  Stars, triple, 72
    variable, 75
    weight of, 313

  Star cluster in Hercules, 79
    in the Centaur, 80

  St. Catherine, 3

  Summer constellations, 53

  Sun, 88
    houses of the, 43
    measurement of distance, 297
    photograph of, 96
    rotation, 99
    temperature of, 105
    total eclipse of, 276
    weight, 106

  Sun and Earth, comparative sizes of, 93

  Sun-spots, 95, 101
    telescopic aspect of, 97


  T

  Temporary stars, 77, 78

  Three Kings, 49

  Total eclipse of the moon, 263
    of sun, 276

  Triangulation, 288

  Triple Star, 72


  U

  Umbra, 95

  Universe, 22, 23, 90

  Urania, 8, 9

  Uranoliths, 201, 204

  Uranus, 162


  V

  Variable stars, 75

  Vega, 40

  Venus, 121, 296
    phases of, 124

  Vesper, 122

  Victor Hugo, 24


  W

  Weighing worlds, 309

  Winter constellations, 51


  Z

  Zodiac, constellations of, 46, 47

  Zones, 225


  FOOTNOTES:

[1] The French edition of this book is entitled Astronomy for
Women.--TRANSLATOR.

[2] 1 kilometer = 0.6214 mile; 100 kilometers may be taken as 62 miles.
1 kilogram is about 2.2 lb.; 5 kilograms = 11 lb.--TRANSLATOR.

[3] It is useful to know the letters of the Greek Alphabet. They are
easily learned, as follows:

          [alpha] Alpha
          [beta] Beta
          [gamma] Gamma
          [delta] Delta
          [epsilon] Epsilon
          [zeta] Zeta
          [eta] Eta
          [theta] Theta
          [iota] Iota
          [kappa] Kappa
          [lambda] Lambda
          [mu] Mu
          [nu] Nu
          [xi] Xi
          [omicron] Omicron
          [pi] Pi
          [rho] Rho
          [sigma] or [sigma] Sigma
          [tau] Tau
          [upsilon] Upsilon
          [phi] Phi
          [chi] Chi
          [psi] Psi
          [omega] Omega



[4] All the stars visible at any hour during the year can easily be
found with the help of the author's Planisphere mobile.

[5] Let it be remarked in passing that the stars might be much farther
off than they are, and invisible to our eyes; the Heavens would then
assume the aspect of an absolutely empty space, the moon and planets
alone remaining.

[6] 14" = 14 seconds of arc. One second of the circle is an exceedingly
minute quantity. It is 1 millimeter seen at a distance of 206 meters.
One millimeter seen at a distance of 20 m. 62 = 10 secs. These values
are invisible to the unaided eye.

[7] These fine double stars can be observed with the help of the
smallest telescope.

[8] For the explanation of the angular distances of degrees, minutes,
and seconds, see Chapter XI, on Methods of Measurement.

[9] The author has endeavored on the plates to represent the aspect of
the Earth in the starry sky of Mercury, Venus, and Mars; but in all
representations of this kind the stars are necessarily made too large.
By calculation the diameters of the Earth and Moon as seen from the
planets, and their distances, are as follows:

                            Diameter of    Diameter of     Distance
                             the Earth.      the Moon.    Earth-Moon.

  Of Mercury (opposition)       20"             8"            871"
  Of Venus (opposition)         64"            17"          1,928"
  Of Mars (quadrature)          15"             4"            464"
  Of Jupiter (quadrature)      3.5"           0.1"            105"

These aspects will be appreciated if we remember that the distance of
the components of [epsilon] Lyre = 207", that of Atlas in Pleione =
301", and that of the stars Mizar and Alcor = 708".

[10] A few evenings ago, after observing Venus in the calm and silent
Heavens at the close of day, my eyes fell upon a drawing sent me by my
friend Gustave Dore, which is included in the illustrations of his
wonderful edition of Dante's Divina Commedia. This drawing seems to be
in place here, and I offer my readers a poor reproduction of it, taken
from the fine engraving in the book. Dante and Virgil, in the peaceful
evening, are contemplating _lo bel pianeta ch'ad amar conforta_ (the
beautiful planet that incites to love).

[11] Strictly speaking, 1 kilometer = 0.6214 mile. Here, as throughout,
the equivalents are only given in round numbers.--TRANSLATOR.

[12] Translator: Compare the well-known English rhyme:

          Thirty days hath September,
          April, June, and November.
          While all the rest have thirty-one,
          Excepting February alone,
          In which but twenty-eight appear
          And twenty-nine when comes Leap Year.



[13] Fifty-eight different pictures of the aspect of the Moon to the
unaided eye will be found in the Monthly Bulletins of the Astronomical
Society of France, for the year 1900, in pursuance of an investigation
made by the author among the different members of the Society.

[14] My readers are charged not to speak of this property (which is
fairly extensive), lest the Budget Commission, at the end of its
resources, should be tempted to put on an unexpected tax. This ring,
which the astronomers presented to me in the year 1887, is almost in the
center of the lunar disk, to the north of Ptolemy and Herschel.

[15] "La fin du Monde." Flammarion, p. 186.

[16] Victor Hugo. _Tristesse d'Olympia._
THE FUTURE OF ASTRONOMY

BY PROFESSOR EDWARD C. PICKERING

Reprinted from the POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY, August, 1909.




THE FUTURE OF ASTRONOMY[1]

BY PROFESSOR EDWARD C. PICKERING

HARVARD COLLEGE OBSERVATORY


It is claimed by astronomers that their science is not only the oldest,
but that it is the most highly developed of the sciences. Indeed it
should be so, since no other science has ever received such support from
royalty, from the state and from the private individual. However this
may be, there is no doubt that in recent years astronomers have had
granted to them greater opportunities for carrying on large pieces of
work than have been entrusted to men in any other department of pure
science. One might expect that the practical results of a science like
physics would appeal to the man who has made a vast fortune through some
of its applications. The telephone, the electric transmission of power,
wireless telegraphy and the submarine cable are instances of immense
financial returns derived from the most abstruse principles of physics.
Yet there are scarcely any physical laboratories devoted to research, or
endowed with independent funds for this object, except those supported
by the government. The endowment of astronomical observatories devoted
to research, and not including that given for teaching, is estimated to
amount to half a million dollars annually. Several of the larger
observatories have an annual income of fifty thousand dollars.

[1] Commencement address at Case School of Applied Science, Cleveland,
May 27, 1909.

I once asked the wisest man I know, what was the reason for this
difference. He said that it was probably because astronomy appealed to
the imagination. A practical man, who has spent all his life in his
counting room or mill, is sometimes deeply impressed with the vast
distances and grandeur of the problems of astronomy, and the very
remoteness and difficulty of studying the stars attract him.

My object in calling your attention to this matter is the hope that what
I have to say of the organization of astronomy may prove of use to those
interested in other branches of science, and that it may lead to placing
them on the footing they should hold. My arguments apply with almost
equal force to physics, to chemistry, and in fact to almost every branch
of physical or natural science, in which knowledge may be advanced by
observation or experiment.

The practical value of astronomy in the past is easily established.
Without it, international commerce on a large scale would have been
impossible. Without the aid of astronomy, accurate boundaries of large
tracts of land could not have been defined and standard time would have
been impossible. The work of the early astronomers was eminently
practical, and appealed at once to every one. This work has now been
finished. We can compute the positions of the stars for years, almost
for centuries, with all the accuracy needed for navigation, for
determining time or for approximate boundaries of countries. The
investigations now in progress at the greatest observatories have
little, if any, value in dollars and cents. They appeal, however, to the
far higher sense, the desire of the intellectual human being to
determine the laws of nature, the construction of the material universe,
and the properties of the heavenly bodies of which those known to exist
far outnumber those that can be seen.

Three great advances have been made in astronomy. First, the invention
of the telescope, with which we commonly associate the name of Galileo,
from the wonderful results he obtained with it. At that time there was
practically no science in America, and for more than two centuries we
failed to add materially to this invention. Half a century ago the
genius of the members of one family, Alvan Clark and his two sons,
placed America in the front rank not only in the construction, but in
the possession, of the largest and most perfect telescopes ever made. It
is not easy to secure the world's record in any subject. The Clarks
constructed successively, the 18-inch lens for Chicago, the 26-inch for
Washington, the 30-inch for Pulkowa, the 36-inch for Lick and the
40-inch for Yerkes. Each in turn was the largest yet made, and each time
the Clarks were called upon to surpass the world's record, which they
themselves had already established. Have we at length reached the limit
in size? If we include reflectors, no, since we have mirrors of 60
inches aperture at Mt. Wilson and Cambridge, and a still larger one of
100 inches has been undertaken. It is more than doubtful, however,
whether a further increase in size is a great advantage. Much more
depends on other conditions, especially those of climate, the kind of
work to be done and, more than all, the man behind the gun. The case is
not unlike that of a battleship. Would a ship a thousand feet long
always sink one of five hundred feet? It seems as if we had nearly
reached the limit of size of telescopes, and as if we must hope for the
next improvement in some other direction.

The second great advance in astronomy originated in America, and was in
an entirely different direction, the application of photography to the
study of the stars. The first photographic image of a star was obtained
in 1850, by George P. Bond, with the assistance of Mr. J.A. Whipple, at
the Harvard College Observatory. A daguerreotype plate was placed at the
focus of the 15-inch equatorial, at that time one of the two largest
refracting telescopes in the world. An image of [Greek: alpha] Lyræ was
thus obtained, and for this Mr. Bond received a gold medal at the first
international exhibition, that at the Crystal Palace, in London, in
1851. In 1857, Mr. Bond, then Professor Bond, director of the Harvard
Observatory, again took up the matter with collodion wet plates, and in
three masterly papers showed the advantages of photography in many ways.
The lack of sensitiveness of the wet plate was perhaps the only reason
why its use progressed but slowly. Quarter of a century later, with the
introduction of the dry plate and the gelatine film, a new start was
made. These photographic plates were very sensitive, were easily
handled, and indefinitely long exposures could be made with them. As a
result, photography has superseded visual observations, in many
departments of astronomy, and is now carrying them far beyond the limits
that would have been deemed possible a few years ago.

The third great advance in astronomy is in photographing the spectra of
the stars. The first photograph showing the lines in a stellar spectrum
was obtained by Dr. Henry Draper, of New York, in 1872. Sir William
Huggins in 1863 had obtained an image of the spectrum of Sirius, on a
photographic plate, but no lines were visible in it. In 1876 he again
took up the subject, and, by an early publication, preceded Dr. Draper.
When we consider the attention the photography of stellar spectra is
receiving at the present time, in nearly all the great observatories in
the world, it may well be regarded as the third great advance in
astronomy.

What will be the fourth advance, and how will it be brought about? To
answer this question we must consider the various ways in which
astronomy, and for that matter any other science, may be advanced.

First, by educating astronomers. There are many observatories where
excellent instruction in astronomy is given, either to the general
student or to one who wishes to make it his profession. At almost any
active observatory a student would be received as a volunteer assistant.
Unfortunately, few young men can afford to accept an unpaid position,
and the establishment of a number of fellowships each offering a small
salary sufficient to support the student would enable him to acquire the
necessary knowledge to fill a permanent position. The number of these
scholarships should not be large, lest more students should undertake
the work than would be required to fill the permanent paying positions
in astronomy, as they become vacant.

In Europe, a favorite method of aiding science is to offer a prize for
the best memoir on a specified subject. On theoretical grounds this is
extremely objectionable. Since the papers presented are anonymous and
confidential, no one but the judges know how great is the effort wasted
in duplication. The larger the prize, the greater the injury to science,
since the greater will be the energy diverted from untried fields. It
would be much wiser to invite applications, select the man most likely
to produce a useful memoir, and award the prize to him if he achieved
success.

The award of a medal, if of great intrinsic value, would be an unwise
expenditure. The Victoria Cross is an example of a successful
foundation, highly prized, but of small intrinsic value. If made of
gold, it would carry no greater honor, and would be more liable to be
stolen, melted down or pawned.

Honorary membership in a famous society, or honorary degrees, have great
value if wisely awarded. Both are highly prized, form an excellent
stimulus to continued work, and as they are both priceless, and without
price, they in no way diminish the capacity for work. I recently had
occasion to compare the progress in various sciences of different
countries, and found that the number of persons elected as foreign
associates of the seven great national societies of the world was an
excellent test. Eighty-seven persons were members of two or more of
these societies. Only six are residents of the United States, while an
equal number come from Saxony, which has only a twentieth of the
population. Of the six residents here, only three were born in the
United States. Not a single mathematician, or doctor, from this country
appears on the list. Only in astronomy are we well represented. Out of a
total of ten astronomers, four come from England, and three from the
United States. Comparing the results for the last one hundred and fifty
years, we find an extraordinary growth for the German races, an equally
surprising diminution for the French and other Latin races, while the
proportion of Englishmen has remained unchanged.

A popular method of expending money, both by countries and by
individuals, is in sending expeditions to observe solar eclipses. These
appeal both to donors and recipients. The former believe that they are
making a great contribution to science, while the latter enjoy a long
voyage to a distant country, and in case of clouds they are not expected
to make any scientific return. If the sky is clear at the time of the
eclipse, the newspapers of the next day report that great results have
been secured, and after that nothing further is ever heard. Exceptions
should be made of the English Eclipse Committee and the Lick
Observatory, which, by long continued study and observation, are
gradually solving the difficult problems which can be reached in this
way only.

The gift of a large telescope to a university is of very doubtful value,
unless it is accompanied, first, by a sum much greater than its cost,
necessary to keep it employed in useful work, and secondly, to require
that it shall be erected, not on the university grounds, but in some
region, probably mountainous or desert, where results of real value can
be obtained.

Having thus considered, among others, some of the ways in which
astronomy is not likely to be much advanced, we proceed to those which
will secure the greatest scientific return for the outlay. One of the
best of these is to create a fund to be used in advancing research,
subject only to the condition that results of the greatest possible
value to science shall be secured. One advantage of this method is that
excellent results may be obtained at once from a sum, either large or
small. Whatever is at first given may later be increased indefinitely,
if the results justify it. One of the wisest as well as the greatest of
donors has said: "Find the particular man," but unfortunately, this plan
has been actually tried only with some of the smaller funds. Any one who
will read the list of researches aided by the Rumford Fund, the
Elizabeth Thompson Fund or the Bruce Fund of 1890 will see that the
returns are out of all proportion to the money expended. The trustees of
such a fund as is here proposed should not regard themselves as patrons
conferring a favor on those to whom grants are made, but as men seeking
for the means of securing large scientific returns for the money
entrusted to them. An astronomer who would aid them in this work, by
properly expending a grant, would confer rather than receive a favor.
They should search for astronomical bargains, and should try to purchase
results where the money could be expended to the best advantage. They
should make it their business to learn of the work of every astronomer
engaged in original research. A young man who presented a paper of
unusual importance at a scientific meeting, or published it in an
astronomical journal, would receive a letter inviting him to submit
plans to the trustees, if he desired aid in extending his work. In many
cases, it would be found that, after working for years under most
unfavorable conditions, he had developed a method of great value and had
applied it to a few stars, but must now stop for want of means. A small
appropriation would enable him to employ an assistant who, in a short
time, could do equally good work. The application of this method to a
hundred or a thousand stars would then be only a matter of time and
money.

The American Astronomical Society met last August at a summer resort on
Lake Erie. About thirty astronomers read papers, and in a large portion
of the cases the appropriation of a few hundred dollars would have
permitted a great extension in these researches. A sad case is that of a
brilliant student who may graduate at a college, take a doctor's degree
in astronomy, and perhaps pass a year or two in study at a foreign
observatory. He then returns to this country, enthusiastic and full of
ideas, and considers himself fortunate in securing a position as
astronomer in a little country college. He now finds himself overwhelmed
with work as a teacher, without time or appliances for original work.
What is worse, no one sympathizes with him in his aspirations, and after
a few years he abandons hope and settles down to the dull routine of
lectures, recitations and examinations. A little encouragement at the
right time, aid by offering to pay for an assistant, for a suitable
instrument, or for publishing results, and perhaps a word to the
president of his college if the man showed real genius, might make a
great astronomer, instead of a poor teacher. For several years, a small
fund, yielding a few hundred dollars annually, has been disbursed at
Harvard in this way, with very encouraging results.

A second method of aiding astronomy is through the large observatories.
These institutions, if properly managed, have after years of careful
study and trial developed elaborate systems of solving the great
problems of the celestial universe. They are like great factories, which
by taking elaborate precautions to save waste at every point, and by
improving in every detail both processes and products, are at length
obtaining results on a large scale with a perfection and economy far
greater than is possible by individuals, or smaller institutions. The
expenses of such an observatory are very large, and it has no pecuniary
return, since astronomical products are not salable. A great portion of
the original endowment has been spent on the plant, expensive buildings
and instruments. Current expenditures, like library expenses, heating,
lighting, etc., are independent of the output. It is like a man swimming
up stream. He may struggle desperately, and yet make no progress. Any
gain in power effects a real advance. This is the condition of nearly
all the larger observatories. Their income is mainly used for current
expenses, which would be nearly the same whatever their output. A
relatively small increase in income can thus be spent to great
advantage. The principal instruments are rarely used to their full
capacities, and the methods employed could be greatly extended without
any addition to the executive or other similar expenses. A man
superintending the work of several assistants can often have their
number doubled, and his output increased in nearly the same proportion,
with no additional expense except the moderate one of their salaries. A
single observatory could thus easily do double the work that could be
accomplished if its resources were divided between two of half the
size.

A third, and perhaps the best, method of making a real advance in
astronomy is by securing the united work of the leading astronomers of
the world. The best example of this is the work undertaken in 1870 by
the Astronomische Gesellschaft, the great astronomical society of the
world. The sky was divided into zones, and astronomers were invited to
measure the positions of all the stars in these zones. The observation
of two of the northern and two of the southern zones were undertaken by
American observatories. The zone from +1° to +5° was undertaken by the
Chicago Observatory, but was abandoned owing to the great fire of 1871,
and the work was assumed and carried to completion by the Dudley
Observatory at Albany. The zone from +50° to +55° was undertaken by
Harvard. An observer and corps of assistants worked on this problem for
a quarter of a century. The completed results now fill seven quarto
volumes of our annals. Of the southern zones, that from -14° to -18° was
undertaken by the Naval Observatory at Washington, and is now finished.
The zone from -10° to -14° was undertaken at Harvard, and a second
observer and corps of assistants have been working on it for twenty
years. It is now nearly completed, and we hope to begin its publication
this year. The other zones were taken by European astronomers. As a
result of the whole, we have the precise positions of nearly a hundred
and fifty thousand stars, which serve as a basis for the places of all
the objects in the sky.

Another example of cooperative work is a plan proposed by the writer in
1906, at the celebration of the two-hundredth anniversary of the birth
of Franklin. It was proposed, first to find the best place in the world
for an astronomical observatory, which would probably be in South
Africa, to erect there a telescope of the largest size, a reflector of
seven feet aperture. This instrument should be kept at work throughout
every clear night, taking photographs according to a plan recommended by
an international committee of astronomers. The resulting plates should
not be regarded as belonging to a single institution, but should be at
the service of whoever could make the best use of them. Copies of any,
or all, would be furnished at cost to any one who wished for them. As an
example of their use, suppose that an astronomer at a little German
University should discover a law regulating the stars in clusters.
Perhaps he has only a small telescope, near the smoke and haze of a
large city, and has no means of securing the photographs he needs. He
would apply to the committee, and they would vote that ten photographs
of twenty clusters, each with an exposure of an hour, should be taken
with the large telescope. This would occupy about a tenth part of the
time of the telescope for a year. After making copies, the photographs
would be sent to the astronomer who would perhaps spend ten years in
studying and measuring them. The committee would have funds at their
disposal to furnish him, if necessary, with suitable measuring
instruments, assistants for reducing the results, and means for
publication. They would thus obtain the services of the most skilful
living astronomers, each in his own special line of work, and the latter
would obtain in their own homes material for study, the best that the
world could supply. Undoubtedly, by such a combination if properly
organized, results could be obtained far better than is now possible by
the best individual work, and at a relatively small expense. Many years
of preparation will evidently be needed to carry out such a plan, and to
save time we have taken the first step and have sent a skilful and
experienced observer to South Africa to study its climate and compare it
with the experience he has gained during the last twenty years from a
similar study of the climate of South America and the western portion of
the United States.

The next question to be considered is in what direction we may expect
the greatest advance in astronomy will be made. Fortunate indeed would
be the astronomer who could answer this question correctly. When Ptolemy
made the first catalogue of the stars, he little expected that his
observations would have any value nearly two thousand years later. The
alchemists had no reason to doubt that their results were as important
as those of the chemists. The astrologers were respected as much as the
astronomers. Although there is a certain amount of fashion in astronomy,
yet perhaps the best test is the judgment of those who have devoted
their lives to that science. Thirty years ago the field was narrow. It
was the era of big telescopes. Every astronomer wanted a larger
telescope than his neighbors, with which to measure double stars. If he
could not get such an instrument, he measured the positions of the stars
with a transit circle. Then came astrophysics, including photography,
spectroscopy and photometry. The study of the motion of the stars along
the line of sight, by means of photographs of their spectra, is now the
favorite investigation at nearly all the great observatories of the
world. The study of the surfaces of the planets, while the favorite
subject with the public, next to the destruction of the earth by a
comet, does not seem to appeal to astronomers. Undoubtedly, the only way
to advance our knowledge in this direction is by the most powerful
instruments, mounted in the best possible locations. Great astronomers
are very conservative, and any sensational story in the newspapers is
likely to have but little support from them. Instead of aiding, it
greatly injures real progress in science.

There is no doubt that, during the next half century, much time and
energy will be devoted to the study of the fixed stars. The study of
their motions as indicated by their change in position was pursued with
great care by the older astronomers. The apparent motions were so small
that a long series of years was required and, in general, for want of
early observations of the precise positions of the faint stars, this
work was confined mainly to the bright stars. Photography is yearly
adding a vast amount of material available for this study, but the
minuteness of the quantities to be measured renders an accurate
determination of their laws very difficult. Moreover, we can thus only
determine the motions at right angles to the line of sight, the motion
towards us or from us being entirely insensible in this way. Then came
the discovery of the change in the spectrum when a body was in motion,
but still this change was so small that visual observations of it proved
of but little value. Attaching a carefully constructed spectroscope to
one of the great telescopes of the world, photographing the spectrum of
a star, and measuring it with the greatest care, provided a tool of
wonderful efficiency. The motion, which sometimes amounts to several
hundreds of miles a second could thus be measured to within a fraction
of a mile. The discovery that the motion was variable, owing to the
star's revolving around a great dark planet sometimes larger than the
star, added greatly not only to the interest of these researches, but
also to the labor involved. Instead of a single measure for each star,
in the case of the so-called spectroscopic binaries, we must make enough
measures to determine the dimensions of the orbit, its form and the
period of revolution.

What has been said of the motions of the stars applies also, in general,
to the determination of their distances. A vast amount of labor has been
expended on this problem. When at length the distance of a single star
was finally determined, the quantity to be measured was so small as to
be nearly concealed by the unavoidable errors of measurement. The
parallax, or one half of the change in the apparent position of the
stars as the earth moves around the sun, has its largest value for the
nearest stars. No case has yet been found in which this quantity is as
large as a foot rule seen at a distance of fifty miles, and for
comparatively few stars is it certainly appreciable. An extraordinary
degree of precision has been attained in recent measures of this
quantity, but for a really satisfactory solution of this problem, we
must probably devise some new method, like the use of the spectroscope
for determining motions. Two or three illustrations of the kind of
methods which might be used to solve this problem may be of interest.
There are certain indications of the presence of a selective absorbing
medium in space. That is, a medium like red glass, for instance, which
would cut off the blue light more than the red light. Such a medium
would render the blue end of the spectrum of a distant star much
fainter, as compared with the red end, than in the case of a near star.
A measure of the relative intensity of the two rays would servo to
measure the distance, or thickness of the absorbing medium. The effect
would be the same for all stars of the same class of spectrum. It could
be tested by the stars forming a cluster, like the Pleiades, which are
doubtless all at nearly the same distance from us. The spectra of stars
of the tenth magnitude, or fainter, can be photographed well enough to
be measured in this way, so that the relative distances of nearly a
million stars could be thus determined.

Another method which would have a more limited application, would depend
on the velocity of light. It has been maintained that the velocity of
light in space is not the same for different colors. Certain stars,
called Algol stars, vary in light at regular intervals when partially
eclipsed by the interposition of a large dark satellite. Recent
observations of these eclipses, through glass of different colors, show
variations in the time of obscuration. Apparently, some of the rays
reach the earth sooner than others, although all leave the star at the
same time. As the entire time may amount to several centuries, an
excessively small difference in velocity would be recognizable. A more
delicate test would be to measure the intensity of different portions of
the spectrum at a time when the light is changing most rapidly. The
effect should be opposite according as the light is increasing or
diminishing. It should also show itself in the measures of all
spectroscopic binaries.

A third method of great promise depends on a remarkable investigation
carried on in the physical laboratory of the Case School of Applied
Science. According to the undulatory theory of light, all space is
filled with a medium called ether, like air, but as much more tenuous
than air as air is more tenuous than the densest metals. As the earth is
moving through space at the rate of several miles a second, we should
expect to feel a breeze as we rush through the ether, like that of the
air when in an automobile we are moving with but one thousandth part of
this velocity. The problem is one of the greatest delicacy, but a former
officer of the Case School, one of the most eminent of living
physicists, devised a method of solving it. The extraordinary result was
reached that no breeze was perceptible. This result appeared to be so
improbable that it has been tested again and again, but every time, the
more delicate the instrument employed, the more certainly is the law
established. If we could determine our motion with reference to the
ether, we should have a fixed line of reference to which all other
motions could be referred. This would give us a line of ever-increasing
length from which to measure stellar distances.

Still another method depends on the motion of the sun in space. There is
some evidence that this motion is not straight, but along a curved line.
We see the stars, not as they are now, but as they were when the light
left them. In the case of the distant stars this may have occurred
centuries ago. Accordingly, if we measure the motion of the sun from
them, and from near stars, a comparison with its actual motion will
give us a clue to their distances. Unfortunately, all the stars appear
to have large motions whose law we do not know, and therefore we have no
definite starting point unless we can refer all to the ether which may
be assumed to be at rest.

If the views expressed to you this morning are correct, we may expect
that the future of astronomy will take the following form: There will be
at least one very large observatory employing one or two hundred
assistants, and maintaining three stations. Two of these will be
observing stations, one in the western part of the United States, not
far from latitude +30°, the other similarly situated in the southern
hemisphere, probably in South Africa, in latitude -30°. The locations
will be selected wholly from their climatic conditions. They will be
moderately high, from five to ten thousand feet, and in desert regions.
The altitude will prevent extreme heat, and clouds or rain will be rare.
The range of temperature and unsteadiness of the air will be diminished
by placing them on hills a few hundred feet above the surrounding
country. The equipment and work of the two stations will be
substantially the same. Each will have telescopes and other instruments
of the largest size, which will be kept at work throughout the whole of
every clear night. The observers will do but little work in the daytime,
except perhaps on the sun, and will not undertake much of the
computation or reductions. This last work will be carried on at a third
station, which will be near a large city where the cost of living and of
intellectual labor is low. The photographs will be measured and stored
at this station, and all the results will be prepared for publication,
and printed there. The work of all three stations will be carefully
organized so as to obtain the greatest result for a given expenditure.
Every inducement will be offered to visiting astronomers who wish to do
serious work at either of the stations and also to students who intend
to make astronomy their profession. In the case of photographic
investigations it will be best to send the photographs so that
astronomers desiring them can work at home. The work of the young
astronomers throughout the world will be watched carefully and large
appropriations made to them if it appears that they can spend them to
advantage. Similar aid will be rendered to astronomers engaged in
teaching, and to any one, professional or amateur, capable of doing work
of the highest grade. As a fundamental condition for success, no
restrictions will be made that will interfere with the greatest
scientific efficiency, and no personal or local prejudices that will
restrict the work.

These plans may seem to you visionary, and too Utopian for the twentieth
century. But they may be nearer fulfilment than we anticipate. The true
astronomer of to-day is eminently a practical man. He does not accept
plans of a sensational character. The same qualities are needed in
directing a great observatory successfully, as in managing a railroad,
or factory. Any one can propose a gigantic expenditure, but to prove to
a shrewd man of affairs that it is feasible and advisable is a very
different matter. It is much more difficult to give away money wisely
than to earn it. Many men have made great fortunes, but few have learned
how to expend money wisely in advancing science, or to give it away
judiciously. Many persons have given large sums to astronomy, and some
day we shall find the man with broad views who will decide to have the
advice and aid of the astronomers of the world, in his plans for
promoting science, and who will thus expend his money, as he made it,
taking the greatest care that not one dollar is wasted. Again, let us
consider the next great advance, which perhaps will be a method of
determining the distances of the stars. Many of us are working on this
problem, the solution of which may come to some one any day. The present
field is a wide one, the prospects are now very bright, and we may look
forward to as great an advance in the twentieth century, as in the
nineteenth. May a portion of this come to the Case School and, with your
support, may its enviable record, in the past, be surpassed by its
future achievements.
Produced by Eric Hutton, Markus Brenner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






                         THE STORY OF ECLIPSES

                  _SIMPLY TOLD FOR GENERAL READERS._

             WITH ESPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE TOTAL ECLIPSE
                      OF THE SUN OF MAY 28, 1900.

                                  BY

                     GEORGE F. CHAMBERS, F.R.A.S.

               _Of the Inner Temple, Barrister-at-Law._

                               AUTHOR OF

      “THE STORY OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM”; “THE STORY OF THE STARS”;
              “A HANDBOOK OF DESCRIPTIVE ASTRONOMY,” ETC.

                      LONDON: GEORGE NEWNES, LTD.
                      SOUTHAMPTON STREET, STRAND
                                 1899.


     _The rights of translation and of reproduction are reserved._


[Illustration: FIG. 1.—THE TOTAL ECLIPSE OF THE SUN, Sept. 7, 1858
(_Liais_).]




                               PREFACE.


The present Volume is intended as a sequel to my two former volumes in
the Newnes Series of “Useful Stories,” entitled respectively the “Story
of the Solar System,” and the “Story of the Stars.” It has been written
not only as a necessary complement, so to speak, to those works, but
because public attention is already being directed to the forthcoming
total eclipse of the Sun on May 28, 1900. This eclipse, though only
visible as a partial one in England, will be total no further off than
Portugal and Spain. Considering also that the line of totality will pass
across a large tract of country forming part of the United States, it
may be inferred that there will be an enormous number of
English-speaking spectators of the phenomenon. It is for these in
general that this little book has been written. For the guidance of
those who may be expected to visit Portugal or Spain, a temporary
Appendix has been prepared, giving a large amount of information showing
how those countries can be best reached, whether by sea or overland,
from the shores of England.

If anyone is inclined to doubt whether an eclipse expedition is likely
to provide non-astronomical tourists with incidents of travel, pleasant,
profitable, and even amusing, perhaps the doubt will be removed by a
perusal of the accounts of Sir F. Galton’s trip to Spain in 1860
(_Vacation Tourists in 1860_, p. 422), or of Professor Tyndall’s trip to
Algeria in 1870 (_Hours of Exercise in the Alps_, p. 429), or of
Professor Langley’s Adventures on Pike’s Peak in the Rocky Mountains,
Colorado, U.S., in 1878 (_Washington Observations_, 1876, Appendix III.
p. 203); or of some of the many Magazine and other narratives of the
Norway eclipse of 1896 and the Indian eclipse of 1898.

Subject to these special points no further prefatory explanation seems
needed, the general style of the contents being, _mutatis mutandis_,
identical with the contents of the Volumes which have gone before.

I have to thank my friend, Dr. A. M. W. Downing, the Superintendent of
the _Nautical Almanac_, for kindly verifying the calculations in
chapters II. and III.

                                                 G. F. C.
NORTHFIELD GRANGE,
    EASTBOURNE, 1899.




                               CONTENTS.

CHAP.                                                       PAGE

    I. INTRODUCTION                                            9

   II. GENERAL IDEAS                                          11

  III. THE SAROS AND THE PERIODICITY OF ECLIPSES              18

   IV. MISCELLANEOUS THEORETICAL MATTERS CONNECTED
           WITH ECLIPSES OF THE SUN (CHIEFLY)                 34

    V. WHAT IS OBSERVED DURING THE EARLIER STAGES
           OF AN ECLIPSE OF THE SUN                           40
         The Moon’s Shadow and the Darkness it causes         41
         Shadow Bands                                         46
         The Approach of Totality                             49
         The Darkness of Totality                             53
         Meteorological and other effects                     54

   VI. WHAT IS OBSERVED DURING THE TOTAL PHASE OF
           AN ECLIPSE OF THE SUN                              56
         Baily’s Beads                                        57
         The Corona                                           62

  VII. WHAT IS OBSERVED AFTER THE TOTAL PHASE OF
           AN ECLIPSE OF THE SUN IS AT AN END                 73

 VIII. ECLIPSES OF THE SUN MENTIONED IN HISTORY—CHINESE       75

   IX. ARE ECLIPSES ALLUDED TO IN THE BIBLE                   86

    X. ECLIPSES MENTIONED IN HISTORY—CLASSICAL               107

   XI. ECLIPSES MENTIONED IN HISTORY—THE CHRISTIAN
           ERA TO THE NORMAN CONQUEST                        128

  XII. ECLIPSES MENTIONED IN HISTORY—MEDIÆVAL
           AND MODERN                                        145

 XIII. ECLIPSES MENTIONED IN HISTORY—NINETEENTH
           CENTURY                                           162

  XIV. THE ELECTRIC TELEGRAPH AS APPLIED TO ECLIPSES
           OF THE SUN                                        179

   XV. ECLIPSES OF THE MOON—GENERAL PRINCIPLES               186

  XVI. ECLIPSES OF THE MOON MENTIONED IN HISTORY             197

 XVII. CATALOGUES OF ECLIPSES: AND THEIR CALCULATION         218

XVIII. STRANGE ECLIPSE CUSTOMS                               224

  XIX. ECLIPSES IN SHAKESPEARE AND THE POETS                 229

   XX. BRIEF HINTS TO OBSERVERS OF ECLIPSES                  233

  XXI. TRANSITS AND OCCULTATIONS                             235

APPENDIX—INFORMATION RESPECTING THE TOTAL
ECLIPSE OF MAY 28, 1900, FOR TRAVELLERS VISITING
PORTUGAL AND SPAIN                                           239




                        LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

                                                            PAGE

FIG. 1. TOTAL ECLIPSE OF THE SUN, SEPTEMBER 7,
          1858                                    _Frontispiece_

  "  2. THEORY OF TOTAL ECLIPSE OF THE SUN                    15

  "  3. THEORY OF AN ANNULAR ECLIPSE OF THE SUN               16

  "  4. ANNULAR ECLIPSE OF THE SUN                            16

  "  5. PARTIAL ECLIPSE OF THE SUN                            17

  "  6. SHADOW BANDS                                          47

  "  7. RAYS OF LIGHT SEEN DURING TOTALITY                    49

  "  8. BRUSHES OF LIGHT                                      57

  "  9. “BAILY’S BEADS,” FOUR STAGES, AT BRIEF
          INTERVALS (MAY 15, 1836)                            58

  " 10. CORONA OF 1882. SUN-SPOT MAXIMUM                      68

  " 11. CORONA OF 1867. SUN-SPOT MINIMUM                      70

  " 12. ECLIPSE OF JAN. 11, 689 B.C. AT JERUSALEM            100

  " 13. THEORY OF AN ECLIPSE OF THE MOON                     187

  " 14. CONDITIONS OF ECLIPSES OF THE MOON                   189

  " 15. OCCULTATION OF JUPITER, AUG. 7, 1889
          (IMMERSION)                                        237

  " 16. OCCULTATION OF JUPITER, AUG. 7, 1889
          (IMMERSION)                                        237

  " 17. OCCULTATION OF JUPITER, AUG. 7, 1889 (EMERSION)      238

  " 18. OCCULTATION OF JUPITER, AUG. 7, 1889 (EMERSION)      238

  " 19. PATH OF THE TOTAL ECLIPSE OF THE SUN OF
          MAY 28, 1900                         _at end of book._




                        THE STORY OF ECLIPSES.




                              CHAPTER I.

                             INTRODUCTION.


It may, I fear, be taken as a truism that “the man in the street”
(collectively, the “general public”) knows little and cares less for
what is called physical science. Now and again when something remarkable
happens, such as a great thunderstorm, or an earthquake, or a volcanic
eruption, or a brilliant comet, or a total eclipse, something in fact
which has become the talk of the town, our friend will condescend to
give the matter the barest amount of attention, whilst he is filling his
pipe or mixing a whisky and soda; but there is not in England that
general attention given to the displays of nature and the philosophy of
those displays, which certainly is a characteristic of the phlegmatic
German. However, things are better than they used to be, and the
forthcoming total eclipse of the Sun of May 28, 1900 (visible as it will
be as a partial eclipse all over Great Britain and Ireland, and as a
total eclipse in countries so near to Great Britain as Spain and
Portugal, to say nothing of the United States), will probably not only
attract a good deal of attention on the part of many millions of
English-speaking people, but may also be expected to induce a
numerically respectable remnant to give their minds and thoughts, with a
certain amount of patient attention, to the Science and Philosophy of
Eclipses.

There are other causes likely to co-operate in bringing this about. It
is true that men’s minds are more enlightened at the end of the 19th
century than they were at the end of the 16th century, and that a trip
to Spain will awaken vastly different thoughts in the year 1900 to those
which would have been awakened, say in the year 1587; but for all that,
a certain amount of superstition still lingers in the world, and total
eclipses as well as comets still give rise to feelings of anxiety and
alarm amongst ill-educated villagers even in so-called civilized
countries. Some amusing illustrations of this will be presented in due
course. For the moment let me content myself by stating the immediate
aim of this little book, and the circumstances which have led to its
being written. What those circumstances are will be understood generally
from what has been said already. Its aim is the unambitious one of
presenting in readable yet sound scientific language a popular account
of eclipses of the Sun and Moon, and (very briefly) of certain kindred
astronomical phenomena which depend upon causes in some degree similar
to those which operate in connection with eclipses. These kindred
phenomena are technically known as “Transits” and “Occultations.”
Putting these two matters entirely aside for the present, we will
confine our attention in the first instance to eclipses; and as eclipses
of the Sun do not stand quite on the same footing as eclipses of the
Moon, we will, after stating the general circumstances of the case, put
the eclipses of the Moon aside for a while.




                              CHAPTER II.

                            GENERAL IDEAS.


The primary meaning of the word “Eclipse” (ἔϰλειψις) is a forsaking,
quitting, or disappearance. Hence the covering over of something by
something else, or the immersion of something in something; and these
apparently crude definitions will be found on investigation to represent
precisely the facts of the case.

Inasmuch as the Earth and the Moon are for our present purpose
practically “solid bodies,” each must cast a shadow into space as the
result of being illuminated by the Sun, regarded as a source of light.
What we shall eventually have to consider is: What results arise from
the existence of these shadows according to the circumstances under
which they are viewed? But before reaching this point, some other
preliminary considerations must be dealt with.

The various bodies which together make up the Solar system, that is to
say, in particular, those bodies called the “planets”—some of them
“primary,” others “secondary” (_alias_ “Satellites” or “Moons”)—are
constantly in motion. Consequently, if we imagine a line to be drawn
between any two at any given time, such a line will point in a different
direction at another time, and so it may occasionally happen that three
of these ever-moving bodies will come into one and the same straight
line. Now the consequences of this state of things were admirably well
pointed out nearly half a century ago by a popular writer, who in his
day greatly aided the development of science amongst the masses. “When
one of the extremes of the series of three bodies which thus assume a
common direction is the Sun, the intermediate body deprives the other
extreme body, either wholly or partially, of the illumination which it
habitually receives. When one of the extremes is the Earth, the
intermediate body intercepts, wholly or partially, the other extreme
body from the view of the observers situate at places on the Earth which
are in the common line of direction, and the intermediate body is seen
to pass over the other extreme body as it enters upon or leaves the
common line of direction. The phenomena resulting from such
contingencies of position and direction are variously denominated
_Eclipses_, _Transits_, and _Occultations_, according to the relative
apparent magnitudes of the interposing and obscured bodies, and
according to the circumstances which attend them.”[1]

The Earth moves round the Sun once in every year; the Moon moves round
the Earth once in every lunar month (27 days). I hope everybody
understands those essential facts. Then we must note that the Earth
moves round the Sun in a certain plane (it is nothing for our present
purpose what that plane is). If the Moon as the Earth’s companion moved
round the Earth in the same plane, an eclipse of the Sun would happen
regularly every month when the Moon was in “Conjunction” (“New Moon”),
and also every month at the intermediate period there would be a total
eclipse of the Moon on the occasion of every “Opposition” (or “Full
Moon”). But inasmuch as the Moon’s orbit does not lie in quite the same
plane as the Earth’s, but is inclined thereto at an angle which may be
taken to average about 5⅛°, the actual facts are different; that is to
say, instead of there being in every year about 25 eclipses (solar and
lunar in nearly equal numbers), which there would be if the orbits had
identical planes, there are only a very few eclipses in the year, never,
under the most favourable circumstances, more than 7, and sometimes as
few as 2. Nor are the numbers equally apportioned. In years where there
are 7 eclipses, 5 of them _may_ be of the Sun and 2 of the Moon; where
there are only 2 eclipses, both _must_ be of the Sun. Under no
circumstances can there be in any one year more than 3 eclipses of the
Moon, and in some years there will be none. The reasons for these
diversities are of a technical character, and a full elucidation of them
would not be of interest to the general reader. It may here be added,
parenthetically, that the occasions will be very rare of there being 5
solar eclipses in one year. This last happened in 1823,[2] and will
only happen once again in the next two centuries, namely in 1935. If a
total eclipse of the Sun happens early in January there may be another
in December of the same year, as in 1889 (Jan. 1 and Dec. 22). This will
not happen again till 2057, when there will be total eclipses on Jan. 5
and Dec. 26. There is one very curious fact which may be here
conveniently stated as a bare fact, reserving the explanation of it for
a future page, namely, that eclipses of the Sun and Moon are linked
together in a certain chain or sequence which takes rather more than 18
years to run out when the sequence recurs and recurs _ad infinitum_. In
this 18-year period, which bears the name of the “Saros,” there usually
happen 70 eclipses, of which 41 are of the Sun and 29 of the Moon.
Accordingly, eclipses of the Sun are more numerous than those of the
Moon in the proportion of about 3 to 2, yet at any given place on the
Earth more lunar eclipses are visible than solar eclipses, because the
former when they occur are visible over the whole hemisphere of the
Earth which is turned towards the Moon whilst the area over which a
total eclipse of the Sun is visible is but a belt of the Earth no more
than about 150 to 170 miles wide. Partial eclipses of the Sun, however,
are visible over a very much wider area on either side of the path
traversed by the Moon’s shadow.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.—THEORY OF A TOTAL ECLIPSE OF THE SUN.]

Confining our attention in the first instance to eclipses of the Sun,
the diagrams fig. 2 and fig. 3 will make clear, with very little verbal
description, the essential features of the two principal kinds of
eclipses of the Sun. In these figures S represents the Sun, M the Moon
and E the Earth. They are not, of course, even approximately drawn to
scale either as to the size of the bodies or their relative distances,
but this is a matter of no moment as regards the principles involved. M
being in sunshine receives light on, as it were, the left hand side,
which faces S the Sun. The shadow of the Moon cast into space is, in the
particular case, thrown as regards its tip on to the Earth and is
intercepted by the Earth. Persons at the moment situated on the Earth
within the limits of this shadow will not see any part of the Sun at
all; they will see, in fact, nothing but the Moon as a black disc with
only such light behind and around it as may be reflected back on to the
sky by the illuminated (but to the Earth invisible) hemisphere of the
Moon, or as may proceed from the Sun’s Corona (to be described
presently). The condition of things therefore is that known as a “total”
eclipse of the Sun so far as regards the inhabitants of the narrow strip
of Earth primarily affected.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.—THEORY OF AN ANNULAR ECLIPSE OF THE SUN.]

Fig. 3 represents nearly but not quite the same condition of things.
Here the Earth and the Moon are in those parts of their respective
orbits which put the two bodies at or near the maximum distance
possible from the Sun and from one another. The Moon casts its usual
shadow, but the tip does not actually reach any part of the Earth’s
surface. Or, in other words, to an observer on the Earth the Moon is not
big enough to conceal the whole body of the Sun. The result is this; at
the instant of central coincidence the Moon covers up only the centre of
the Sun, leaving the outer edge all round uncovered.

This outer edge shows as a bright ring of light, and the eclipse is of
the sort known as an “annular” eclipse of the Sun.[3] As the greatest
breadth of the annulus can never exceed 1½ minutes of arc, an annular
eclipse may sometimes, in some part of its track, become almost or quite
total, and _vice versâ_.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.—ANNULAR ECLIPSE OF THE SUN.]

The idea will naturally suggest itself, what exactly does happen to the
inhabitants living outside (on the one side or the other) of the strip
of the Earth where the central line of shadow falls? This depends in
every case on circumstances, but it may be stated generally that the
inhabitants outside the central line but within 1000 to 2000 miles on
either side, will see a larger or smaller part of the Sun concealed by
the Moon’s solid body, simultaneously with the total concealment of the
Sun to the favoured individuals who live, or who for the moment are
located, within the limits of the central zone.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.—PARTIAL ECLIPSE OF THE SUN.]

Now we must advance one stage in our conceptions of the movements of the
Earth and the Moon, so far as regards the bearing of those movements on
the question of eclipses. The Earth moves in a plane which is called the
“Plane of the Ecliptic,” and correspondingly, the Sun has an _apparent_
annual motion in the same plane. The Moon moving in a different plane,
inclined to the first mentioned one to the extent of rather more than
5°, the Moon’s orbit will evidently intersect the ecliptic in two
places. These places of intersection are called “Nodes,” and the line
which may be imagined to join these Nodes is called the “Line of Nodes.”
When the Moon is crossing the ecliptic from the S. to the N. side
thereof, the Moon is said to be passing through its “Ascending Node”
(☊); the converse of this will be the Moon passing back again from the
N. side of the ecliptic to the S. side, which is the “Descending Node”
(☋). Such changes of position, with the terms designating them, apply
not only to the Moon in its movement round the Earth, but to all the
planets and comets circulating round the Sun; and also to satellites
circulating round certain of the planets, but with these matters we have
no concern now.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 1: D. Lardner, _Handbook of Astronomy_, 3rd ed., p. 288.]

    [Footnote 2: But not one of them was visible at Greenwich.]

    [Footnote 3: Latin _Annulus_, a ring.]




                             CHAPTER III.

             THE “SAROS” AND THE PERIODICITY OF ECLIPSES.


To bring about an eclipse of the Sun, two things must combine: (1) the
Moon must be at or near one of its Nodes; and (2), this must be at a
time when the Moon is also in “Conjunction” with the Sun. Now the Moon
is in Conjunction with the Sun (= “New Moon”) 12 or 13 times in a year,
but the Sun only passes through the Nodes of the Moon’s orbit twice a
year. Hence an eclipse of the Sun does not and cannot occur at every New
Moon, but only occasionally. An _exact_ coincidence of Earth, Moon, and
Sun, in a straight line at a Node is not necessary to ensure an eclipse
of the Sun. So long as the Moon is within about 18½° of its Node, with a
latitude of not more than 1° 34′, an eclipse _may_ take place. If,
however, the distance is less than 15¼° and the latitude less than
1° 23′ an eclipse _must_ take place, though between these limits[4] the
occurrence of an eclipse is uncertain and depends on what are called the
“horizontal parallaxes” and the “apparent semi-diameters” of the two
bodies at the moment of conjunction, in other words, on the nearness or
“far-offness” of the bodies in question. Another complication is
introduced into these matters by reason of the fact that the Nodes of
the Moon’s orbit do not occupy a fixed position, but have an annual
retrograde motion of about 19¼°, in virtue of which a complete
revolution of the Nodes round the ecliptic is accomplished in 18 years
218⅞ days (= 18.5997 years).

The backward movement of the Moon’s Nodes combined with the apparent
motion of the Sun in the ecliptic causes the Moon in its monthly course
round the Earth to complete a revolution with respect to its Nodes in a
less time (27.2 days) than it takes to get back to Conjunction with the
Sun (29.5 days); and a curious consequence, as we shall see directly,
flows from these facts and from one other fact. The other fact is to the
Sun starting coincident with one of the Moon’s Nodes, returns on the
Ecliptic to the same Node in 346.6 days. The first named period of 27.2
days is called the “_Nodical_ Revolution of the Moon” or “Draconic
Month,” the other period of 29.5 days is called the “_Synodical_
Revolution of the Moon.” Now the curious consequence of these figures
being what they are is that 242 Draconic Months, 223 Lunations, and 19
Returns of the Sun to one and the same Node of the Moon’s orbit, are all
accomplished in the same time within 11 hours. Thus (ignoring
refinements of decimals):—

               Days     Days.  Years.  Days.  Hours.

    242 times  27.2 = 6585.36 = 18      10      8½
    223 times  29.5 = 6585.32 = 18      10      7¾
     19 times 346.6 = 6585.78 = 18      10     18¾

The interpretation to be put upon these coincidences is this: that
supposing Sun and Moon to start together from a Node they would, after
the lapse of 6585 days and a fraction, be found again together very near
the same Node. During the interval there would have been 223 New and
Full Moons. The exact time required for 223 Lunations is such that in
the case supposed the 223rd conjunction of the two bodies would happen a
little before they reached the Node; their distance therefrom would be
28′ of arc. And the final fact is that eclipses recur in almost, though
not quite, the same regular order every 6585⅓ days, or more exactly, 18
years, 10 days, 7 hours, 42 minutes.[5] This is the celebrated Chaldean
“SAROS,” and was used by the ancients (and can still be used by the
moderns in the way of a pastime) for the prediction of eclipses alike of
the Sun and of the Moon.

                   *       *       *       *       *

At the end of a Saros period, starting from any date that may have been
chosen, the Moon will be in the same position with respect to the Sun,
nearly in the same part of the heavens, nearly in the same part of its
orbit, and very nearly indeed at the same distance from its Node as at
the date chosen for the _terminus a quo_ of the Saros. But there are
trifling discrepancies in the case (the difference of about 11 hours
between 223 lunations and 19 returns of the Sun to the Moon’s Node is
one) and these have an appreciable effect in disturbing not so much the
sequence of the eclipses in the next following Saros as their magnitude
and visibility at given places on the Earth’s surface. Hence, a more
accurate succession will be obtained by combining 3 Saros periods,
making 54 years, 31 days; while, best of all, to secure an almost
perfect repetition of a series of eclipses will be a combination of 48
Saroses, making 865 years for the Moon; and of about 70 Saroses, or more
than 1200 years for the Sun.

These considerations are leading us rather too far afield. Let us return
to a more simple condition of things. The practical use of the Saros in
its most elementary conception is somewhat on this wise. Given 18 or 19
old Almanacs ranging, say, from 1880 to 1898, how can we turn to account
the information they afford us in order to obtain from them information
respecting the eclipses which will happen between 1899 and 1917?
Nothing easier. Add 18^y 10^d 7^h 42^m to the middle time of every
eclipse which took place between 1880 and 1898 beginning, say, with the
last of 1879 or the first of 1880, and we shall find what eclipses will
happen in 1898 and 17 following years, as witness by way of example the
following table:—

                                            Error of Saros by
                             d.  h. m.      Exact Calculation.
       MOON.     1879   Dec. 28  4  26 p.m.
(Mag. 0.17)        18        10  7  42
---------------------------------------------
(Mag. 0.16)      1898   Jan.  8 12   8 a.m. (civil time) +3 m.

                             d.  h. m.
       SUN.      1880   Jan. 11 10  48 p.m.
(Total)            18        10  7  42
---------------------------------------------
(Total)          1898   Jan. 22  6  30 a.m. (civil time) -1 h. 7 m.

                             d.  h. m.
       MOON.     1880   June 22  1  50 p.m.
(Mag. Total)       18        11  7  42
---------------------------------------------
(Mag. 0.93)      1898   July  3  9  32 p.m. +35 m.

                             d.  h. m.
       SUN.      1880   July  7  1  35 p.m.
(Mag. Annular)     18        11  7  42
---------------------------------------------
(Mag. Annular)   1898   July 18  9  17 p.m. +1 h. 10 m.

                             d.  h. m.
       SUN.      1880   Dec.  2  3  11 a.m. (civil time).
(Mag. 0.04)        18        11  7  42
---------------------------------------------
(Mag. 0.02)      1898   Dec. 13 10  53 a.m. -1 h. 5 m.

                             d.  h. m.
       MOON.     1880   Dec. 16  3  39 p.m.
(Mag. Total)       18        11  7  42
---------------------------------------------
(Mag. Total)     1898   Dec. 27 11  21 p.m. -13 m.

                             d.  h. m.
       SUN.      1880   Dec. 31  1  45 p.m.
(Mag. 0.71)        18        11  7  42
---------------------------------------------
(Mag. 0.72)      1899   Jan. 11  9  27 p.m. -1 h. 11 m.

There having been 5 recurrences of Feb. 29 between Dec. 1879 and Jan.
1899, 5 leap years having intervened, we have to add an extra day to the
Saros period in the later part of the above Table.[6]

Let us make another start and see what we can learn from the eclipses,
say, of 1883.

                                             Error of Saros by
                                             Exact Calculation.
                                  h. m.
    MOON         1883   April 22  11 39 a.m.
(Mag. 0.8)         18         11   7 42
--------------------------------------------
(Mag. Penumbral) 1901   May    3   7 21 p.m. +51 m.

                                  h. m.
    SUN          1883   May    6   9 45 p.m. Visible, Philippines.
(Mag. Total)       18         11   7 42
--------------------------------------------
(Mag. Total)     1901   May   18   5 27 a.m. (civil time). -2 m.

                                  h. m.
    MOON         1883   Oct.  16   6 54 a.m. Visible, California.
(Mag. 0.28)        18         11   7 42
--------------------------------------------
(Mag. 0.23)      1901   Oct.  27   2 36 p.m. -39 m.

                                  h. m.
    SUN          1883   Oct.  30  11 37 p.m. Visible, N. Japan.
(Mag. Annular)     18         11   7 42
--------------------------------------------
(Mag. Annular)   1901   Nov.  11   7 19 a.m. (civil time) +1 m.

The foregoing does not by any means exhaust all that can be said
respecting the Saros even on the popular side.

If the Saros comprised an exact number of days, each eclipse of a second
Saros series would be visible in the same regions of the Earth as the
corresponding eclipse in the previous series. But since there is a
surplus fraction of nearly one-third of a day, each subsequent eclipse
will be visible in another region of the Earth, which will be roughly a
third of the Earth’s circumference in longitude backwards (_i.e._ about
120° to the W.), because the Earth itself will be turned on its axis
one-third forwards.

After what has been said as to the Saros and its use it might be
supposed that a correct list of eclipses for 18.03 years would suffice
for all ordinary purposes of eclipse prediction, and that the sequence
of eclipses at any future time might be ascertained by adding to some
one eclipse which had already happened so many Saros periods as might
embrace the years future whose eclipses it was desired to study. This
would be true in a sense, but would not be literally and effectively
true, because corresponding eclipses do not recur exactly under the same
conditions, for there are small residual discrepancies in the times and
circumstances affecting the real movements of the Earth and Moon and the
apparent movement of the Sun which, in the lapse of years and centuries,
accumulate sufficiently to dislocate what otherwise would be exact
coincidences. Thus an eclipse of the Moon which in A.D. 565 was of 6
digits[7] was in 583 of 7 digits, and in 601 nearly 8. In 908 the
eclipse became total, and remained so for about twelve periods, or until
1088. This eclipse continued to diminish until the beginning of the 15th
century, when it disappeared in 1413. Let us take now the life of an
eclipse of the Sun. One appeared at the North Pole in June A.D. 1295,
and showed itself more and more towards the S. at each subsequent
period. On August 27, 1367, it made its first appearance in the North of
Europe; in 1439 it was visible all over Europe; in 1601, being its 19th
appearance, it was central and annular in England; on May 5, 1818, it
was visible in London, and again on May 15, 1836. Its three next
appearances were on May 26, 1854, June 6, 1872, and June 17, 1890. At
its 39th appearance, on August 10, 1980, the Moon’s shadow will have
passed the equator, and as the eclipse will take place nearly at
midnight (Greenwich M.T.), the phenomenon will be invisible in Europe,
Africa, and Asia. At every succeeding period the central line of the
eclipse will lie more and more to the S., until finally, on September
30, 2665, which will be its 78th appearance, it will vanish at the South
Pole.[8]

The operation of the Saros effects which have been specified above, may
be noticed in some of the groups of eclipses which have been much in
evidence (as will appear from a subsequent chapter), during the second
half of the 19th century. The following are two noteworthy Saros groups
of Solar eclipses:—

    1842  July  8.    |    1850  Aug.   7.
    1860   "   18.    |    1868   "    17.
    1878   "   29.    |    1886   "    29.
    1896  Aug.  9.    |    1904  Sept.  9.

If the curious reader will trace, by means of the _Nautical Almanac_
(or some other Almanac which deals with eclipses in adequate detail),
the geographical distribution of the foregoing eclipses on the Earth’s
surface, he will see that they fulfil the statement made on p. 24
(_ante_), that a Saros eclipse when it reappears, does so in regions of
the Earth averaging 120° of longitude to the W. of those in which it
had, on the last preceding occasion, been seen; and also that it
gradually works northwards or southwards.

But a given Saros eclipse in its successive reappearances undergoes
other transformations besides that of Terrestrial longitude. These are
well set forth by Professor Newcomb[9]:—

“Since every successive recurrence of such an eclipse throws the
conjunction 28′ further toward the W. of the node, the conjunction must,
in process of time, take place so far back from the node that no eclipse
will occur, and the series will end. For the same reason there must be a
commencement to the series, the first eclipse being E. of the node. A
new eclipse thus entering will at first be a very small one, but will be
larger at every recurrence in each Saros. If it is an eclipse of the
Moon, it will be total from its 13th until its 36th recurrence. There
will be then about 13 partial eclipses, each of which will be smaller
than the last, when they will fail entirely, the conjunction taking
place so far from the node that the Moon does not touch the Earth’s
shadow. The whole interval of time over which a series of lunar eclipses
thus extend will be about 48 periods, or 865 years. When a series of
solar eclipses begins, the penumbra of the first will just graze the
earth not far from one of the poles. There will then be, on the average,
11 or 12 partial eclipses of the Sun, each larger than the preceding
one, occurring at regular intervals of one Saros. Then the central line,
whether it be that of a total or annular eclipse, will begin to touch
the Earth, and we shall have a series of 40 or 50 central eclipses. The
central line will strike near one pole in the first part of the series;
in the equatorial regions about the middle of the series, and will leave
the Earth by the other pole at the end. Ten or twelve partial eclipses
will follow, and this particular series will cease.”

These facts deserve to be expanded a little.

We have seen that all eclipses may be grouped in a series, and that 18
years or thereabouts is the duration of each series, or Saros cycle. But
these cycles are themselves subject to cycles, so that the Saros itself
passes through a cycle of about 64 Saroses before the conditions under
which any given start was made, come quite round again. Sixty-four times
18 make 1152, so that the duration of a Solar eclipse Great Cycle may be
taken at about 1150 years. The progression of such a series across the
face of the Earth is thus described by Mrs. Todd, who gives a very clear
account of the matter:—

“The advent of a slight partial eclipse near either pole of the Earth
will herald the beginning of the new series. At each succeeding return
conformably to the Saros, the partial eclipse will move a little further
towards the opposite pole, its magnitude gradually increasing for about
200 years, but during all this time only the lunar penumbra will impinge
upon the Earth. But when the true shadow begins to touch, the
obscuration will have become annular or total near the pole where it
first appeared. The eclipse has now acquired a track, which will cross
the Earth slightly farther from that pole every time it returns, for
about 750 years. At the conclusion of this interval, the shadow path
will have reached the opposite pole; the eclipse will then become
partial again, and continue to grow smaller and smaller for about 200
years additional. The series then ceases to exist, its entire duration
having been about 1150 years. The series of “great eclipses” of which
two occurred in 1865 and 1883, while others will happen in 1901, 1919,
1937, 1955, and 1973, affords an excellent instance of the northward
progression of eclipse tracks; and another series, with totality nearly
as great (1850, 1868, 1886, 1904, and 1922), is progressing slowly
southwards.”

The word “Digit,” formerly used in connection with eclipses, requires
some explanation. The origin of the word is obvious enough, coming as it
does from the Latin word _Digitus_, a finger. But as human beings have
only eight fingers and two thumbs it is by no means clear how the word
came to be used for twelfths of the disc of the Sun or Moon instead of
tenths. However, such was the case; and when a 16th-century astronomer
spoke of an eclipse of six digits, he meant that one-half of the
luminary in question, be it Sun or Moon, was covered. The earliest use
of the word “Digit” in this connection was to refer to the twelfth part
of the visible _surface_ of the Sun or Moon; but before the word went
out of use, it came to be applied to twelfths of the visible _diameter_
of the disc of the Sun or Moon, which was much more convenient. However,
the word is now almost obsolete in both senses, and partial eclipses,
alike of the Sun and of the Moon, are defined in decimal parts of the
diameter of the luminary—tenths or hundredths according to the amount of
precision which is aimed at. Where an eclipse of the Moon is described
as being of more than 12 Digits or more than 1.0 (= 1 diameter) it is to
be understood that the eclipse will be (or was) not only total, but that
the Moon will be (or was) immersed in the Earth’s shadow with a more or
less considerable extent of shadow encompassing it.

There are some further matters which require to be mentioned connected
with the periodicity of eclipses. To use a phrase which is often
employed, there is such a thing as an “Eclipse Season,” and what this is
can only be adequately comprehended by looking through a catalogue of
eclipses for a number of years arranged in a tabular form, and by
collating the months or groups of months in which batches of eclipses
occur. This is not an obvious matter to the casual purchaser of an
almanac, who, feeling just a slight interest in the eclipses of a coming
new year, dips into his new purchase to see what those eclipses will be.
A haphazard glance at the almanacs of even two or three successive years
will probably fail to bring home to him the idea that each year has its
own eclipse season in which eclipses may occur, and that eclipses are
not to be looked for save at two special epochs, which last about a
month each, and which are separated from one another and from the
eclipse seasons of the previous and of the following years by intervals
of about six months, within a few days more or less. Such, however, is
the case. A little thought will soon make it clear why such should be
the case. We have already seen that the Moon’s orbit, like that of every
other planetary member of the Solar System, has two crossing places with
respect to the ecliptic which are called “Nodes.” We know also that the
apparent motion of the Sun causes that body to traverse the whole of the
ecliptic in the course of the year. The conjoint result of all this is
that the Moon passes through a Node twice in every lunar month of 27
days, and the Sun passes (apparently) through a Node twice in every
year. The first ultimate result of these facts is that eclipses can only
take place at or near the nodal passages of the Moon and the Sun, and
that as the Sun’s nodal passages are separated by six months in every
case the average interval between each set of eclipses, if there is more
than one, must in all cases be six months, more or less by a few days,
dependent upon the latitude and longitude of the Moon at or about the
time of its Conjunction or Opposition under the circumstances already
detailed. If the logic of this commends itself to the reader’s mind, he
will see at once why eclipses or groups of eclipses must be separated by
intervals of about half an ordinary year. Hence it comes about that,
taking one year with another, it may be said that we shall always have a
couple of principal eclipses with an interval of half a year (say 183
days) between each; and that on either side of these dominant eclipses
there will, or may be, a fortnight before or a fortnight after, two
other pairs of eclipses with, in occasional years, one extra thrown in.
It is in this way that we obtain what it has already been said
dogmatically that we do obtain; namely, always in one year two eclipses,
which must be both of the Sun, or any number of eclipses up to seven,
which number will be unequally allotted to the Sun or to the Moon
according to circumstances.

Though it is roughly correct to say that the two eclipse seasons of
every year run to about a month each, in length, yet it may be desirable
to be a little more precise, and to say that the limits of time for
solar eclipses cover 36 days (namely 18 days before and 18 days after
the Sun’s nodal passages); whilst in the case of the Moon, the limits
are the lesser interval of 23 days, being 11½ on either side of the
Moon’s nodal passages.

We have already seen[10] that the Moon’s nodes are perpetually
undergoing a change of place. Were it not so, eclipses of the Sun and
Moon would always happen year after year in the same pair of months for
us on the Earth. But the operative effect of the shifting of the nodes
is to displace backwards the eclipse seasons by about 20 days. For
instance in 1899 the eclipse seasons fall in June and December. The
middle of the eclipse seasons for the next succeeding 20 or 30 years
will be found by taking the dates of June 8 and December 2, 1899, and
working the months backwards by the amount of 19⅔ days for each
succeeding year. Thus the eclipse seasons in 1900 will fall in the
months of May and November; accordingly amongst the eclipses of that
year we shall find eclipses on May 28, June 13, and November 22.

Perhaps it would tend to the more complete elucidation of the facts
stated in the last half dozen pages, if I were to set out in a tabular
form all the eclipses of a succession, say of half a Saros or 9 years,
and thus exhibit by an appeal to the eye directly the grouping of
eclipse seasons the principles of which I have been endeavouring to
define and explain in words.

                    Approximate
                    Mid-interval.


1894. March 21. ☾ } March 29. *
      April  6. ☉ }

      Sept. 15. ☾ } Sept. 22. **
      Sept. 29. ☉ }

1895. March 11. ☾ } March 18. *
      March 26. ☉ }

      Aug.  20. ☉ }
      Sept.  4. ☾ } Sept.  4. **
      Sept. 18. ☉ }

1896. Feb.  13. ☉ } Feb.  20. *
      Feb.  28. ☾ }

      Aug.   9. ☉ } Aug.  16. **
      Aug.  23. ☾ }

1897. Feb.   1. ☉   Feb.   1. *

      July  29. ☉   July  29. **

1898. Jan.   7. ☾ } Jan.  14. *
      Jan.  22. ☉ }

      July   3. ☾ } July. 10. **
      July  18. ☉ }

      Dec.  13. ☉ }
      Dec.  27. ☾ } Dec.  27. *
1899. Jan.  11. ☉ }

      June   8. ☉ } June  15. **
      June  23. ☾ }

      Dec.   2. ☉ } Dec.   9. *
      Dec.  16. ☾ }

1900. May   28. ☉ } June   5. **
      June  13. ☾ }

      Nov.  22. ☉   Nov.  22. *

1901. May    3. ☾ } May   10. **
      May   18. ☉ }

      Oct.  27. ☾ } Nov.   3. *
      Nov.  11. ☉ }

1902. April  8. ☉ }
      April 22. ☾ } April 22. **
      May    7. ☉ }

      Oct.  17. ☾ } Oct.  24. *
      Oct.  31. ☉ }

The Epochs in the last column which are marked with stars (*) or (**) as
the case may be, represent corresponding nodes so that from any one
single-star date to the next nearest single-star date means an interval
of one year less (on an average) the 19⅔ days spoken of on p. 32
(_ante_). A glance at each successive pair of dates will quickly
disclose the periodical retrogradation of the eclipse epochs.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 4: These limits are slightly different in the case of
    eclipses of the Moon. (See p. 190, _post_.)]

    [Footnote 5: This assumes that 5 of these years are leap years.]

    [Footnote 6: If there are 5 leap years in the 18, the odd days will
    be 10; if 4 they will be 11; if only 3 leap years (as from 1797 to
    1815 and 1897 to 1915), the odd days to be added will be 12.]

    [Footnote 7: See p. 28 (_post_) for an explanation of this word.]

    [Footnote 8: In Mrs. D. P. Todd’s interesting little book, _Total
    Eclipses of the Sun_ (Boston, U.S., 1894), which will be several
    times referred to in this work, two maps will be found, which will
    help to illustrate the successive northerly or southerly progress of
    a series of Solar eclipses, during centuries.]

    [Footnote 9: In his and Professor Holden’s _Astronomy for Schools
    and Colleges_, p. 184.]

    [Footnote 10: See p. 19 (_ante_).]




                              CHAPTER IV.

              MISCELLANEOUS THEORETICAL MATTERS CONNECTED
                  WITH ECLIPSES OF THE SUN (CHIEFLY).


One or two miscellaneous matters respecting eclipses of the Sun
(chiefly) will be dealt with in this chapter. It is not easy to explain
or define in words the circumstances which control the duration of a
Solar eclipse, whereas in the case of a lunar eclipse the obscuration is
the same in degree at all parts of the Earth where the Moon is visible.
In the case of a Solar eclipse it may be total, perhaps, in Africa, may
be of six digits only in Spain, and of two only in England. Under the
most favourable circumstances the breadth of the track of totality
across the Earth cannot be more than 170 miles, and it may be anything
less than that down to zero where the eclipse will cease to be total at
all, and will become annular. The question whether a given eclipse shall
exhibit itself on its central line as a total or an annular one depends,
as has been already explained, on the varying distances of the Earth and
the Moon from the Sun in different parts of their respective orbits.
Hence it follows that not only may an eclipse show itself for several
Saros appearances as total and afterwards become annular, and _vice
versâ_, but on rare occasions one and the same eclipse may be annular in
one part of its track across the Earth and total in another part, a
short time earlier or later. This last-named condition might arise
because the Moon’s distance from the Earth or the Sun had varied
sufficiently during the progress of the eclipse to bring about such a
result; or because the shadow just reaching the Earth and no more the
eclipse would be total only for the moment when a view perpendicular
upwards could be had of it, and would be annular for the minutes
preceding and the minutes following the perpendicular glimpse obtained
by observers actually on the central line. The eclipse of December 12,
1890, was an instance of this.

If the paths of several central eclipses of the Sun are compared by
placing side by side a series of charts, such as those given in the
_Nautical Almanac_ or in Oppolzer’s _Canon_, it will be noticed that the
direction of the central line varies with the season of the year. In the
month of March the line runs from S.W. to N.E., and in September from
N.W. to S.E. In June the line is a curve, going first to the N.E. and
then to the S.E. In December the state of things is reversed, the curve
going first to the S.E. and then to the N.E. At all places within about
2000 miles of the central line the eclipse will be visible, and the
nearer a place is to the central line, so much the larger will be the
portion of the Sun’s disc concealed from observers there by the Moon.
If the central line runs but a little to the N. of the Equator in Winter
or of 25° of N. latitude in Summer, the eclipse will be visible all over
the Northern Hemisphere, and the converse will apply to the Southern
Hemisphere. It is something like a general rule in the case of total and
annular eclipses, though subject to many modifications, that places
within 200-250 miles of the central line will have partial eclipse of 11
digits; from thence to 500 miles of 10 digits, and so on, diminishing
something like 1 digit for every 250 miles, so that at 2000 miles, or
rather more, the Sun will be only to a very slight extent eclipsed, or
will escape eclipse altogether.

The diameter of the Sun being 866000 miles and the Moon being only 2160
miles or 1/400th how comes it to be possible that such a tiny object
should be capable of concealing a globe 400 times bigger than itself?
The answer is—Distance. The increased distance does it. The Moon at its
normal distance from the Earth of 237000 miles could only conceal by
eclipse a body of its own size or smaller, but the Sun being 93000000
miles away, or 392 times the distance of the Moon, the fraction 1/392
representing the main distance of the Moon, more than wipes out the
fraction 1/400 which represents our satellite’s smaller size.

During a total eclipse of the Sun, the Moon’s shadow travels across the
Earth at a prodigious pace—1830 miles an hour; 30½ miles a minute; or
rather more than a ½ mile a second. This great velocity is at once a
clue to the fact that the total phase during an eclipse of the Sun
lasts for so brief a time as a few minutes; and also to the fact that
the shadow comes and goes almost without being seen unless a very sharp
watch is kept for it. Indeed, it is only observers posted on high ground
with some miles of open low ground spread out under their eyes who have
much chance of detecting the shadow come up, go over them, and pass
forwards.

Places at or near the Earth’s equator enjoy the best opportunities for
seeing total eclipses of the Sun, because whilst the Moon’s shadow
travels eastwards along the Earth’s surface at something like 2000 miles
an hour, an observer at the equator is carried in the same direction by
virtue of the Earth’s axial rotation at the rate of 1040 miles an hour.
But the speed imparted to an observer as the result of the Earth’s axial
rotation diminishes from the equator towards the poles where it is
_nil_, so that the nearer he is to a pole the slower he goes, and
therefore the sooner will the Moon’s shadow overtake and pass him, and
the less the time at his disposal for seeing the Sun hidden by the Moon.

It was calculated by Du Sèjour that the greatest possible duration of
the total phase of a Solar eclipse at the equator would be 7^m 58^s, and
for the latitude of Paris 6^m 10^s. In the case of an annular eclipse
the figures would be 12^m 24^s for the equator, and 9^m 56^s for the
latitude of Paris. These figures contemplate a combination of all the
most favourable circumstances possible; as a matter of fact, I believe
that the greatest length of total phase which has been actually known
was 6½^m and that was in the case of the eclipse of August 29, 1886. It
was in the open Atlantic that this duration occurred, but it was not
observed. The maximum observed obscuration during this eclipse was no
more than 4^m.

Though total eclipses of the Sun happen with tolerable frequency so far
as regards the Earth as a whole, yet they are exceedingly rare at any
given place. Take London, for instance. From the calculations of Hind,
confirmed by Maguire,[11] it may be considered as an established fact
that there was no total eclipse visible at London between A.D. 878 and
1715, an interval of 837 years. The next one visible at London, though
uncertain, is also a very long way off. There will be a total eclipse on
August 11, 1999, which will come as near to London as the Isle of Wight,
but Hind, writing in 1871, said that he doubted whether there would be
any other total eclipse “visible _in England_ for 250 years[12] from the
present time.” Maguire states that the Sun has been eclipsed, besides
twice at London, also twice at Dublin, and no fewer than five times at
Edinburgh during the 846 years examined by him. In fact that every part
of the British Isles has seen a total eclipse at some time or other
between A.D. 878 and 1724 except a small tract of country at Dingle, on
the West coast of Ireland. The longest totality was on June 15, 885,
namely, 4^m 55^s, and the shortest in July 16, 1330, namely, 0^m 56^s.

Contrast with this the obscure island of Blanquilla, off the northern
coast of Venezuela. The inhabitants of that island not long ago had the
choice of two total eclipses within three and a half years, namely,
August 29, 1886, and December 22, 1889; whilst Yellowstone, U.S., had
two in twelve years (July 29, 1878, and January 1, 1889).

Counting from first to last, Du Sèjour found that at the equator an
eclipse of the Sun might last 4^h 29^m, and at the latitude of Paris 3^h
26^m. These intervals, of course, cover all the subordinate phases. The
total phase which alone (with perhaps a couple of minutes added) is
productive of spectacular effects, and interesting scientific results is
a mere matter of minutes which may be as few as one (or less), or only
as many as 6 or 8.

As a rule, a summer eclipse will last longer than a winter one, because
in summer the Earth (and the Moon with it), being at its maximum
distance from the Sun, the Sun will be at its minimum apparent size, and
therefore the Moon will be able to conceal it the longer.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 11: _Month. Not._, _R.A.S._, vol. xlv., p. 400. June
    1885.]

    [Footnote 12: Johnson makes the eclipse of June 14, 2151, to be
    “nearly, if not quite, total at London.” Possibly it was this
    eclipse which Hind had in his thoughts when he wrote in the _Times_
    (July 28, 1871) the passage quoted above.]




                              CHAPTER V.

              WHAT IS OBSERVED DURING THE EARLIER STAGES
                       OF AN ECLIPSE OF THE SUN.


The information to be given in this and the next following chapters will
almost exclusively concern total and annular eclipses of the Sun, for,
in real truth, there is practically only one thing to think about during
a partial eclipse of the Sun. This is, to watch when the Moon’s black
body comes on to the Sun and goes off again, for there are no subsidiary
phenomena, either interesting or uninteresting, unless, indeed, the
eclipse should be nearly total. The progress of astronomical science in
regard to eclipses has been so extensive and remarkable of late years
that, unless the various points for consideration are kept together
under well-defined heads, it will be almost impossible either for a
writer or a reader to do full justice to the subject. Having regard to
the fact that the original conception of this volume was that it should
serve as a forerunner to the total solar eclipse of May 28, 1900 (and
through that to other total eclipses), from a popular rather than from a
technical standpoint, I think it will be best to mention one by one the
principal features which spectators should look out for, and to do so as
nearly as may be in the order which Nature itself will observe when the
time comes.

Of course the commencement of an eclipse, which is virtually the moment
when the encroachment on the circular outline of the Sun by the Moon
begins, or can be seen, though interesting as a proof that the
astronomer’s prophecy is about to be fulfilled, is not a matter of any
special importance, even in a popular sense, much less in a scientific
sense. As a rule, the total phase does not become imminent, so to speak,
until a whole hour and more has elapsed since the first contact; and
that hour will be employed by the scientific observer, less in looking
at the Sun than in looking at his instruments and apparatus. He will do
this for the purpose of making quite sure that everything will be ready
for the full utilisation to the utmost extent of the precious seconds of
time into which all his delicate observations have to be squeezed during
the total phase.

With these preliminary observations I shall proceed now to break up the
remainder of what I have to say respecting total eclipses into what
suggest themselves as convenient sectional heads.


             THE MOON’S SHADOW AND THE DARKNESS IT CAUSES.

In awaiting the darkness which is expected to manifest itself an
unthinking and inexperienced observer is apt to look out for the coming
obscurity, as he looks out for night-fall half an hour or more after
sunset and during the evening twilight. The darkness of an eclipse is
all this and something more. It is something more in two senses; for the
interval of time between the commencement of an eclipse and totality is
different in duration and different in quality, so to speak, from the
diminution of daylight on the Earth which ensues as the twilight of
evening runs its course. Speaking roughly, sunset may be described as an
almost instantaneous loss of full sunlight; and the gradual loss of
daylight is noticeable even at such short intervals as from one five
minutes to another. This is by no means the case previous to a total
eclipse of the Sun. When that is about to occur, the reduction of the
effective sunlight is far more gradual. For instance, half an hour after
an eclipse has commenced more than half the Sun’s disc will still be
imparting light to the Earth: but half an hour after sunset the
deficiency of daylight will be very much more marked and, if no
artificial light is at hand, very much more inconvenient.

If there should be within easy reach of the observer’s post a bushy
tree, such for instance as an elm, 30 ft. or 40 ft. high, and spreading
out sufficiently for him to place himself under it in a straight line
with the Sun, and with a nice smooth surface of ground for the sun’s
rays to fall on, he will see a multitude of images of the Sun thrown
upon the ground.

Until the eclipse has commenced these images will be tiny circles
overlapping one another, and of course each of these circles means so
many images of the Sun. These images indeed can be seen on any fine day,
and the circles increase in size in proportion to the height of the
foliage above the ground, being something like 1 inch for every 10 feet.
It may be remarked, by the way, that the images are circles, because the
Sun is a source of light having a circular outline, and is not a point
of light like a star. If it were, the outline of the foliage would be
reproduced on the ground leaf for leaf. It follows naturally from all
this that when in consequence of there being an eclipse in progress the
shape of the Sun’s contour gradually changes, so will the shape of the
Solar images on the ground change, becoming eventually so many
crescents. Moreover, the horns of the crescent-shaped images will be in
the reverse direction to the horns of the actual crescent of the Sun at
the moment, the rays of the Sun crossing as they pass through the
foliage, just as if each interstice were a lens.

Supposing there are some spots on the Sun at a time when an eclipse is
in progress the Moon’s passage over these spots may as well be noticed.
In bygone years some amount of attention was devoted to this matter with
the view of ascertaining whether any alteration took place in the
appearance of the spots; distortion, for instance, such as might be
produced by the intervention of a lunar atmosphere. No such distortion
was ever noticed, and observations with this idea in view may be said to
possess now only an academic interest, for it may be regarded as a
well-established fact that the Moon has no atmosphere.

During the passage of the Moon over Sun-spots an opportunity is afforded
of comparing the blackness, or perhaps we should rather say, the
intensity of the shade of a Sun-spot with the blackness of the Moon’s
disc. Testimony herein is unanimous that the blackness of the Moon
during the stages of partial eclipse is intense compared with the
darkest parts of a Sun-spot; and this, be it remembered, in spite of the
fact that during the partial phase the atmosphere between the observer
and the Sun is brilliantly illuminated, whilst the Moon itself, being
exposed to Earth-shine, is by no means absolutely devoid of all
illumination.

When the Moon is passing across the Sun there have often been noticed
along the limb of the Moon fringes of colour, and dark and bright bands.
This might not necessarily be a real appearance for it is conceivable
that such traces of colour might be due to the telescopes employed not
having been truly achromatic, that is, not sufficiently corrected for
colour; but making every allowance for this possible source of mistake
there yet remains proof that the colour which has often been seen has
been real.

As to whether the Moon’s limb can be seen during a partial eclipse, or
during the partial phase of what is to be a total eclipse, the evidence
is somewhat conflicting. There is no doubt that when the totality is
close at hand the Moon’s limb can be seen projected on the Corona
(presently to be described); but the question is, whether the far-off
limb of the Moon can be detected in the open sky whilst something like
full daylight still prevails on the Earth. Undoubtedly the preponderance
of evidence is against the visibility of the Moon as a whole, under such
circumstances; but there is nevertheless some testimony to the contrary.
A French observer, E. Liais, said that three photographic plates of the
eclipse of 1858 seen in S. America all showed the outer limb of the
Moon with more or less distinctness. This testimony, be it noted, is
photographic and not visual; and on the whole it seems safest to say
that there is very small probability of the Moon as a whole ever being
seen under the circumstances in question.

What has just been said concerns the visibility of the Moon during quite
the early, or on the other hand during quite the late, stages of a total
eclipse. Immediately before or after totality the visibility of the
whole contour of the Moon is a certain fact; and the only point upon
which there is a difference of opinion is as to what are the time-limits
beyond which the Moon must not be expected to be seen. The various
records are exceedingly contradictory: perhaps the utmost that can be
said is that the whole Moon must not be expected to be visible till
about 20 minutes before totality, or for more than 5 minutes after
totality—but it must be admitted that these figures are very uncertain
in regard to any particular eclipse.

It has been sometimes noticed when the crescent of the Sun had become
comparatively small, say that the Sun was about ⅞ths covered, that the
uncovered portion exhibited evident colour which has been variously
described as “violet,” “brick-red,” “reddish,” “pink,” “orange,”
“yellowish.” The observations on this point are not very numerous and,
as will appear from the statement just made, are not very consistent;
still it seems safe to assume that a hue, more or less reddish, does
often pervade the uncovered portion of a partially-eclipsed Sun.

The remark just made as regards the Sun seems to have some application
to the Moon. There are a certain number of instances on record that what
is commonly spoken of as the black body of the Moon does, under certain
circumstances, display traces of red which has been variously spoken of
as “crimson,” “dull coppery,” “reddish-brownish” and “dull glowing
coal.”


                             SHADOW BANDS.

Let us suppose that we have a chance of observing a total eclipse of the
Sun; have completed all our preliminary preparations; have taken note of
everything which needs to be noted or suggests itself for that purpose
up till nearly the grand climax; and that the clock tells us that we are
within, say, five minutes of totality. Somewhere about this time perhaps
we shall be able to detect, dancing across the landscape, singular wavy
lines of light and shade. These are the “Shadow Bands,” as they are
called. The phrase is curiously inexplicit, but seemingly cannot be
improved upon at present because the philosophy of these
appearances—their origin and the laws which regulate their
visibility—are unknown, perhaps because amid the multitude of other
things to think about sufficient attention has hitherto not been paid to
the study of them. These shadow bands are most striking if a high
plastered wall, such as the front of a stone or stuccoed house, is in
their track as a screen to receive them. The shadow bands seem to vary
both in breadth and distance apart at different eclipses, and also in
the speed with which they pass along. Though, as already stated, little
is known of their origin yet they may be conceived to be due to
irregularities in the atmospheric refraction of the slender beam of
light coming from the waning or the waxing crescent of the Sun, for be
it understood they may be visible after totality as well as before it.
It is to be remarked that they have never been photographed.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.—SHADOW BANDS.]

In addition to the shadow bands there are instances on record of the
limbs of the Sun’s crescent appearing to undulate violently on the
approach of totality. These undulations were noticed by Airy in 1842
about 6 minutes before totality. Blake, in America in 1869, observed the
same phenomenon 8 minutes before totality. In other cases the interval
would seem to have been very much shorter—a mere matter of seconds. A
very singular observation was made in 1858 by Mr. J. D. Smith at Laycock
Abbey, Wiltshire, on the occasion of the annular eclipse of that year.
He says[13]:—“Both my brother and myself were distinctly impressed with
the conviction that the withdrawal of light was not continuous, but by
pulsations, or, as it were, waves of obscuration, the darkness
increasing by strokes which sensibly smote the eye, and were repeated
distinctly some five or seven times after we had remarked the phenomenon
and before the time of greatest obscuration. This did not occur on the
return of light, which came back continuously and without shock or
break.” Rümker mentions that though this phenomenon was very apparent to
the naked eye it was not visible in the telescope.

Faint rays or brushes of light sometimes seem to spring from the
diminishing crescent of the Sun. These rays generally are very transient
and not very conspicuous, and perhaps must be distinguished as regards
both their appearance and their origin from the more striking rays
which are usually seen a few minutes before or after totality, and which
are generally associated with, or even deemed to belong to, the Corona.
Fig. 7 represents these rays as seen in Spain on July 18, 1860, some
minutes after totality. They are described as having been well defined,
but at some moments more marked than at others, and though well-defined
yet constantly varying. Radiations of light more or less of the
character just described may probably be regarded as a standing feature
of every total eclipse.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.—RAYS OF LIGHT SEEN NEAR THE TIME OF TOTALITY.]


                       THE APPROACH OF TOTALITY.

The next thing to think about and to look out for is the approach of the
Moon’s shadow. I have mentioned this already,[14] and also the
appalling velocity with which it seems to approach. By this time the
coming darkness, which characterises every total phase, will have
reached an advanced stage of development. The darkness begins to be
felt. The events which manifest themselves at this juncture on the Earth
(rather than in the sky around the Sun) are so graphically described by
the American writer whom I have already quoted, and who writes,
moreover, from personal experience, that I cannot do better than
transfer her striking account to my pages.[15] “Then, with frightful
velocity, the actual shadow of the Moon is often seen approaching, a
tangible darkness advancing almost like a wall, swift as imagination,
silent as doom. The immensity of nature never comes quite so near as
then, and strong must be the nerves not to quiver as this blue-black
shadow rushes upon the spectator with incredible speed. A vast, palpable
presence seems overwhelming the world. The blue sky changes to gray or
dull purple, speedily becoming more dusky, and a death-like trance
seizes upon everything earthly. Birds, with terrified cries, fly
bewildered for a moment, and then silently seek their night-quarters.
Bats emerge stealthily. Sensitive flowers, the scarlet pimpernel, the
African mimosa, close their delicate petals, and a sense of hushed
expectancy deepens with the darkness. An assembled crowd is awed into
absolute silence almost invariably. Trivial chatter and senseless joking
cease. Sometimes the shadow engulfs the observer smoothly, sometimes
apparently with jerks; but all the world might well be dead and cold and
turned to ashes. Often the very air seems to hold its breath for
sympathy; at other times a lull suddenly awakens into a strange wind,
blowing with unnatural effect. Then out upon the darkness, gruesome but
sublime, flashes the glory of the incomparable corona, a silvery, soft,
unearthly light, with radiant streamers, stretching at times millions of
uncomprehended miles into space, while the rosy, flaming protuberances
skirt the black rim of the Moon in ethereal splendour. It becomes
curiously cold, dew frequently forms, and the chill is perhaps mental as
well as physical. Suddenly, instantaneous as a lightning flash, an arrow
of actual sunlight strikes the landscape, and Earth comes to life again,
while corona and protuberances melt into the returning brilliance, and
occasionally the receding lunar shadow is glimpsed as it flies away with
the tremendous speed of its approach.”

In connection with the approach of the Moon’s shadow, it is to be noted
that at totality the heavens appear in a certain sense to descend upon
the Earth. If an observer is looking upwards towards the zenith over his
head, he will see the clouds appear to drop towards the Earth, and the
surrounding gloom seems also to have the effect of vitiating one’s
estimate of distances. To an observer upon a high hill, a plain below
him appears to become more distant. Although what has been called the
descent of the clouds (that is to say their appearance of growing
proximity) is most manifest immediately before the totality, yet a sense
of growing nearness may sometimes be noticed a very considerable time
before the total phase is reached.

Whilst on the subject of clouds, it may be mentioned that although there
is in the vault of heaven generally during the total phase an
appreciable sensation of black darkness, more or less absolute, that is
to say, either blackish or greyish, yet in certain regions of the sky,
(generally in the direction of the horizon) the clouds, when there are
any, often exhibit colours in strata, orange hue below and red above,
with indigo or grey or black higher up still, right away to the Sun’s
place. The cause of these differences is to be found in the fact that
the lower part of the atmosphere within the area of the Moon’s shadow
is, under the circumstances in question, illuminated by light which
having passed through many miles of atmosphere near to the Earth’s
surface, has lost much from the violet end of its spectrum, leaving an
undue proportion of the red end.

On certain occasions iridescent or rainbow-tinted clouds may be seen in
the vicinity of the Sun, either before, or during, or after totality,
depending on circumstances unknown. Such clouds have been observed at
all these three stages of a total eclipse. The effects of course are
atmospheric, and have no physical connection with either Sun or Moon.


                       THE DARKNESS OF TOTALITY.

With respect to the general darkness which prevails during totality,
great discrepancies appear in the accounts, not only as between
different eclipses, but in respect of the same eclipse observed by
different people at different places. Perhaps the commonest test applied
by most observers is that of the facility or difficulty of reading the
faces of chronometers or watches. Sometimes this is done readily, at
other times with difficulty. In India in 1868, one observer stated that
it was impossible to recognise a person’s face three yards off, and
lamplight was needed for reading his chronometer. On the other hand in
Spain in 1860, it was noted that a thermometer, as well as the finest
hand-writing, could be read easily. The foregoing remarks apply to the
state of things in the open air. In 1860, it was stated that inside a
house in Spain the darkness was so great that people moving about had to
take great care lest they should run violently against the household
furniture.

Perhaps on the whole it may be said that the darkness of an ordinary
totality is decidedly greater than that of a full Moon night.

Many observers have noted during totality that even when there has not
been any very extreme amount of absolute darkness, yet the ruddy light
already mentioned as prevailing towards the horizon often gives rise to
weird unearthly effects, so that the faces of bystanders assume a
sickly livid hue not unlike that which results from the light of burning
salt.


                   METEOROLOGICAL AND OTHER EFFECTS.

It is very generally noticed that great changes take place in the
meteorological conditions of the atmosphere as an eclipse of the Sun
runs its course from partial phase to totality, and back again to
partial phase. It goes without saying that the obstruction of the solar
rays by the oncoming Moon would necessarily lead to a steady and
considerable diminution in the general temperature of the air. This has
often been made the matter of exact thermometric record, but it is not
equally obvious why marked changes in the wind should take place. As the
partial phase proceeds it is very usual for the wind to rise or blow in
gusts and to die away during totality, though there are many exceptions
to this, and it can hardly be called a rule.

The depression of temperature varies very much indeed according to the
locality where the eclipse is being observed and the local thermometric
conditions which usually prevail. The actual depression will often
amount to 10° or 20° and the deposit of dew is occasionally noticed.

In addition to the general effects of a total solar eclipse on men,
animals, and plants as summarised in the extract already made from Mrs.
Todd’s book a few additional particulars may be given culled from many
recorded observations. Flowers and leaves which ordinarily close at
night begin long before totality to show signs of closing up. Thus we
are told that in 1836 “the crocus, gentian and anemone partially closed
their flowers and reopened them as the phenomenon passed off: and a
delicate South African mimosa which we had reared from a seed entirely
folded its pinnate leaves until the Sun was uncovered.” In 1851 “the
night violet, which shortly before the beginning of the eclipse had
little of its agreeable scent about it, smelt strongly during the
totality.”

In the insect world ants have been noticed to go on working during
totality, whilst grasshoppers are stilled by the darkness, and
earth-worms come to the surface. Birds of all kinds seem always upset in
their habits, almost invariably going to roost as the darkness becomes
intensified before totality. In 1868 “a small cock which had beforehand
been actively employed in grubbing about in the sand went to sleep with
his head under his wing and slept for about 10 minutes, and on waking
uttered an expression of surprise, but did not crow.” In 1869 mention is
made of an unruly cow “accustomed to jump into a corn-field at night”
being found to have trespassed into the said corn-field during the total
phase.

The thrilling descriptions of the effects of the oncoming darkness of
totality, derived from the records of past total eclipses, are not
likely to be improved upon in the future, for we shall receive them more
and more from amateurs and less and less from astronomical experts.
Every additional total eclipse which happens testifies to the fact that
the time and thoughts of these latter classes of people will be to an
increasing degree dedicated to instrumental work rather than to simple
naked eye or even telescopic observation. The spectroscope and the
camera are steadily ousting the simple telescope of every sort and
unassisted eye observations from solar eclipse work.

Mrs. Todd has the following apt remarks by way of summary of the results
to an individual of observing a total eclipse of the Sun:—“I doubt if
the effect of witnessing a total eclipse ever quite passes away. The
impression is singularly vivid and quieting for days, and can never be
wholly lost. A startling nearness to the gigantic forces of Nature and
their inconceivable operation seems to have been established.
Personalities and towns and cities, and hates and jealousies, and even
mundane hopes, grow very small and very far away.”

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 13: _Month. Not._, R.A.S., vol. xviii. p. 251.]

    [Footnote 14: See p. 36 (_ante_).]

    [Footnote 15: Mrs. D. P. Todd, _Total Eclipses of the Sun_, p. 21.]




                              CHAPTER VI.

   WHAT IS OBSERVED DURING THE TOTAL PHASE OF AN ECLIPSE OF THE SUN.


The central feature of every total eclipse of the Sun is undoubtedly the
Corona[16] and the phenomena connected with it; but immediately before
the extinction of the Sun’s light and incidental thereto there are some
minor features which must be briefly noticed.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.—BRUSHES OF LIGHT.]

The Corona first makes its appearance on the side of the dark Moon
opposite to the disappearing crescent, but brushes of light are
sometimes observed on the same side, along the convex limb of the
disappearing crescent. The appearance of the brushes will be
sufficiently realised by an inspection of the annexed engraving without
the necessity of any further verbal description. These brushes are
little, if at all, coloured, and must not be confused with the “Red
Flames” or “Prominences” hereafter to be described.


                            BAILY’S BEADS.

When the disc of the Moon has advanced so much over that of the Sun as
to have reduced the Sun almost to the narrowest possible crescent of
light, it is generally noticed that at a certain stage the crescent
suddenly breaks up into a succession of spots of light. These spots are
sometimes spoken of as “rounded” spots, but it is very doubtful whether
(certainly in view of their supposed cause) they could possibly be
deemed ever to possess an outline, which by any stretch, could be called
“rounded.” Collating the recorded descriptions, some such phrase as
“shapeless beads” of light would seem to be the most suitable
designation. These are observed to form before the total phase, and
often also after the total phase has passed. Under the latter
circumstances, the beads of light eventually run one into another, like
so many small drops of water merging into one big one. The commonly
received explanation of “Baily’s Beads” is that they are no more than
portions of the Sun’s disc, seen through valleys between mountains of
the Moon, the said mountains being the cause why the bright patches are
discontinuous. It is exceedingly doubtful whether this is the true
explanation. The whole question is involved in great uncertainty, and
well deserves careful study during future eclipses; but this it is not
likely to get, in view of the current fashion of every sufficiently
skilled observer concentrating his attention on matters connected with
the solar Corona (observed spectroscopically or otherwise), to the
exclusion of what may be called older subjects of study. I will dismiss
Baily’s Beads from our consideration with the remark that the first
photograph of them was obtained at Ottumwa, Illinois, U.S., during the
eclipse of 1869.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.—“BAILY’S BEADS,” FOUR STAGES, AT BRIEF INTERVALS.
MAY 15, 1836.]

“Baily’s Beads” received their name from Mr. Francis Baily, who, in
1836, for the first time exhaustively described them; but they were
probably seen and even mentioned long before his time. At the total
eclipse of the Sun, seen at Penobscot in North America, on October 27,
1780, they would seem to have been noticed, and perhaps even earlier
than that date.

Almost coincident with the appearance of Baily’s Beads, that is, either
just before or just after, and also just before or just after the
absolute totality (there seems no certain rule of time) jets of red
flame are seen to dart out from behind the disc of the Moon. It is now
quite recognised as a certain fact that these “Red Flames” belong to the
Sun and are outbursts of hydrogen gas. Moreover, they are now commonly
called “Prominences,” and with the improved methods of modern science
may be seen almost at any time when the Sun is suitably approached; and
they are not restricted in their appearance to the time when the Sun is
totally eclipsed as was long supposed.

I may have more to say about these Red Flames later on; but am at
present dealing only with the outward appearances of things.
Carrington’s description has been considered very apt. One which he saw
in 1851 he likened to “a mighty flame bursting through the roof of a
house and blown by a strong wind.”

Certain ambiguous phrases made use of in connection with eclipses of
ancient date may perhaps in reality have been allusions to the Red
Flames; otherwise the first account of them given with anything like
scientific precision seems to be due to a Captain Stannyan, who observed
them at Berne during the eclipse of 1706. His words are that the Sun at
“his getting out of his eclipse was preceded by a blood-red streak from
its left limb which continued not longer than six or seven seconds of
time; then part of the Sun’s disc appeared all of a sudden.”

Some subsequent observers spoke of the Red Flames as isolated jets of
red light appearing here and there; whilst others seem to have thought
they had seen an almost or quite continuous ring of red light around the
Sun. The last-named idea is now recognised as the more accurate
representation of the actual facts, the Red Flames being emanations
proceeding from a sort of shell enveloping the Sun, to which shell the
name of “Chromosphere” has now come to be applied.

As regards the Moon itself during the continuance of the total phase,
all that need be said is that our satellite usually exhibits a disc
which is simply black; but on occasions observers have called it purple
or purplish. Although during totality the Moon is illuminated by a full
allowance of Earth-shine (light reflected by the Earth into space), yet
from all accounts this is always insufficient to reveal any traces of
the irregularities of mountains and valleys, etc., which exist on the
Moon.

When during totality any of the brighter planets, such as Mercury,
Venus, Mars, Jupiter, or Saturn, happen to be in the vicinity of the Sun
they are generally recognised; but the stars seen are usually very few,
and they are only very bright ones of the 1st or 2nd magnitudes. Perhaps
an explanation of the paucity of stars noticed is to be found in the
fact that the minds of observers are usually too much concentrated on
the Sun and Moon for any thought to be given to other things or other
parts of the sky.

Perhaps this is a convenient place in which to recall the fact that
there has been much controversy in the astronomical world during the
last 50 years as to whether there exist any undiscovered planets
revolving round the Sun within the orbit of Mercury. Whilst there is
some evidence, though slight, that one or more such planets have been
seen, opponents of the idea base their scepticism on the fact that with
so many total eclipses as there have been since 1859 (when Lescarbault
claimed to have found a planet which has been called “Vulcan”), no
certain proof has been obtained of the existence of such a planet; and
what better occasion for finding one (if one exists of any size) than
the darkness of a total solar eclipse? At present it must be confessed
that the sceptics have the best of it.


                              THE CORONA.

We have now to consider what I have already called the central feature
of every total eclipse. It was long ago compared to the nimbus often
placed by painters around the heads of the Virgin Mary and other saints
of old; and as conveying a rough general idea the comparison may still
stand. It has been suggested that not a bad idea of it may be obtained
by looking at a Full Moon through a wire-gauze window-screen. The Corona
comes into view a short time (usually to be measured by seconds) before
the total extinction of the Sun’s rays, lasts during totality and
endures for a brief interval of seconds (or it might be a minute) after
the Sun has reappeared. It was long a matter of discussion whether the
Corona belonged to the Sun or the Moon. In the early days of telescopic
astronomy there was something to be said perhaps on both sides, but it
is now a matter of absolute certainty that it belongs to the Sun, and
that the Moon contributes nothing to the spectacle of a total eclipse of
the Sun, except its own solid body, which blocks out the Sun’s light,
and its shadow, which passes across the Earth.

Of the general appearance of the Corona some idea may be obtained from
Fig. 1 (see Frontispiece) which so far as it goes needs little or no
verbal description. Stress must however be laid on the word “general”
because every Corona may be said to differ from its immediate
predecessor and successor, although, as we shall see presently, there
is strong reason to believe that there is a periodicity in connection
with Coronas as with so many other things in the world of Astronomy. A
curious point may here be mentioned as apparently well established,
namely, that when long rays are noticed in the Corona they do not seem
to radiate from the Sun’s centre as the short rays more or less seem to
do. Though the aggregate brilliancy of the Corona varies somewhat yet it
may be taken to be much about equal on the whole to the Moon at its
full. The Corona is quite unlike the Moon as regards heat for its
radiant heat has been found to be very well marked.

There is another thing connected with the Sun’s Corona which needs to be
mentioned at the outset and which also furnishes a reason for treating
it in a somewhat special manner. The usual practice in writing about
science is to deal with it in the first instance descriptively, and then
if any historical information is to be given to exhibit that separately
and subsequently. But our knowledge of the Sun’s Corona has developed so
entirely by steps from a small beginning that it is neither easy nor
advantageous to keep the history separate or in the background and I
shall therefore not attempt to do so.

Astronomers are not agreed as to what is the first record of the Corona.
It is commonly associated with a total eclipse which occurred in the 1st
century A.D. and possibly in the year 96 A.D. Some details of the
discussion will be found in a later chapter,[17] and I will make no
further allusion to the matter here. Passing over the eclipses of 968
A.D. and 1030 A.D. the records of both of which possibly imply that the
Corona was noticed, we may find ourselves on thoroughly firm ground in
considering the eclipse of April 9, 1567. Clavius, a well-known writer
on chronology, undoubtedly saw then the Corona in the modern acceptation
of the word but thought it merely the uncovered rim of the Sun. In reply
to this Kepler showed by some computations of his own, based on the
relative apparent sizes of the Sun and Moon, that Clavius’s theory was
untenable. Kepler, however, put forth a theory of his own which was no
better, namely, that the Corona was due to the existence of an
atmosphere round the Moon and proved its existence. From this time
forwards we have statements, by various observers, applying to various
eclipses, of the Corona seeming to be endued with a rotatory motion. The
Spanish observer, Don A. Ulloa, in 1778, wrote thus respecting the
Corona seen in that year:—“After the immersion we began to observe round
the Moon a very brilliant circle of light which seemed to have a rapid
circular motion something similar to that of a rocket turning about its
centre.” Modern observations furnish no counterpart of these ideas of
motion in the Corona. Passing over many intervening eclipses we must
note that of 1836 (which gave us “Baily’s Beads”) as the first which set
men thinking that total eclipses of the Sun exhibited subsidiary
phenomena deserving of careful and patient attention. Such attention
was given on the occasion of the eclipses of 1842 and 1851, still
however without the Corona attracting that interest which it has gained
for itself more recently. It was noticed indeed that the Corona always
first showed itself on the side of the Moon farthest from the vanishing
crescent but the full significance of this fact was not at first
realised. Mrs. Todd well remarks:—“In the early observations of the
Corona it was regarded as a halo merely and so drawn. Its real structure
was neither known, depicted, nor investigated. The earliest pictures all
show this. Preconceived ideas prejudiced the observers, and their
sketches were mostly structureless.... It should not be forgotten that
the Coronal rays project outward into space from a spherical Sun and do
not lie in a plane as they appear to the eye in photographs and
drawings.” After remarking on the value of photographs of the Corona up
to a certain point because of their automatic accuracy Mrs. Todd very
sensibly says, “but pencil drawings, while ordinarily less trustworthy
because involving the uncertain element of personal equation are more
valuable in delineating the finest and faintest detail of which the
sensitive plate rarely takes note; the vast array of both, however,
shows marked differences in the structure and form of the Corona from
one eclipse to another though it has not yet revealed rapid changes
during any one observation. This last interesting feature can be studied
only by comparison of photographs near the beginning of an eclipse track
and its end, two or three hours of absolute time apart.” Concerted
efforts to accomplish this were made in 1871, 1887, and 1889, but they
broke down because the weather failed at one or other end of the chain
of observing stations and a succession of photographs not simultaneous
but separated by sufficient intervals of time could not be had. The
eclipse of 1893, however, yielded successful though negative results.
Photographs in South America compared with photographs in Africa two
hours later in time disclosed no appreciable difference in the structure
of the Corona and its streamers. The eclipse of May 28, 1900, will
furnish the next favourable opportunity for a repetition of this
experiment by reason of the fact that the line of totality begins in
North America, crosses Portugal and Spain and ceases in Africa. In other
words, traverses countries eminently calculated to facilitate the
establishment of photographic observing stations where observations can
be made not simultaneously but at successive intervals spread over
several hours.

Although of course the Corona had been observed long before the year
1851, as indeed we have already seen, yet the eclipse of 1851 is the
farthest back which we can safely take as a starting-point for gathering
up thoroughly precise details, because it was the first at which
photography was brought into use. Starting, therefore, with that eclipse
I want to lay before the reader some of the very interesting and
remarkable generalisations which (thanks especially to Mr. W. H.
Wesley’s skilful review of many of the photographic results) are now
gradually unfolding themselves to astronomers. To put the matter in the
fewest possible words there seems little or no doubt that according as
spots on the Sun are abundant or scarce so the Corona when visible
during an eclipse varies in appearance from one period of _eleven_ years
to another like period. Or, to put it in another way, given the date of
a coming total eclipse we can predict to a certain extent the probable
shape and character of the Corona if we know how the forthcoming date
stands as regards a Sun-spot maximum or minimum.

The most recent important eclipses up to date which have been observed,
namely those of April 16, 1893, Aug. 9, 1896, and Jan. 21, 1898, do not
add much to our useful records of the outward appearances presented by
the Corona. The 1896 Corona is described as intermediate between the two
Types respectively associated with years of maximum and minimum
Sun-spots, and this is as it should have been, albeit there was one
extension which reached to about two diameters of the Sun. The 1898
Corona yielded four long Coronal streamers reaching much farther from
the Sun than any previously seen, the two longest reaching to 4½ and 6
diameters of the Sun respectively. These dimensions are quite
unprecedented.

[Illustration: FIG. 10.—CORONA OF 1882. (SUN-SPOT MAXIMUM.)]

The application of the spectroscope to observations of eclipses of the
Sun demands a few words of notice in this place, but it would not be
consistent with the plan of this work to go into details. Though the
spectroscope has been applied under many different circumstances to
different parts of the Sun’s surroundings in connection with total
eclipses yet it is in regard to the Corona that most has been done and
most has been discovered. The substance of the discoveries made is that
the Corona shines with an intrinsic light of its own, that is to say,
that it is composed of constituents whose temperature is sufficiently
elevated to be self-luminous. These constituents are chiefly hydrogen;
the body which corresponds to the line D3 (of Fraunhofer’s scale), and
which has been named “Helium”; and the body which corresponds to the
bright green line 1474 of Kirchoff’s scale and which, since its
existence was first suspected and then assured, has been named
“Coronium.”

The reader will not be surprised to learn, from what has gone before,
that an immense mass of records have accumulated respecting the
appearance of the Corona. Correspondingly numerous and divergent are the
theories which have been launched to explain the observations made. One
thing is in the highest degree probable, namely, that electricity is
largely concerned.

Going back to the question of Sun-spots regarded in their possible or
probable association with the Corona, the present position of matters
appears to be this: that there is a real connection between the general
form of the Corona and disturbances on the Sun, taking Sun-spots as an
indication of solar activity. When Sun-spots are at or near their
maximum, the Corona has generally been somewhat symmetrical, with
synclinal groups of rays making angles of 45° with its general axis. On
the other hand, at the epochs of minimum Sun-spots, the Corona shows
polar rifts much more widely open, with synclinal zones making larger
angles with the axis, and being, therefore, more depressed towards the
equatorial regions, in which, moreover, there is usually a very marked
extension of Coronal matter in the form of elongated streamers reaching
to several diameters of the Sun.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.—CORONA OF 1867. (SUN-SPOT MINIMUM.)]

This generalisation is well borne out by the maximum-epoch Coronas of
1870 and 1871, and the minimum-epoch Coronas of 1867, 1874, 1875, 1878,
and perhaps 1887, and certainly 1889. On the other hand, the eclipses of
1883, 1885 and 1886 do not strikingly confirm this theory. The eclipse
of 1883 was at a time of rapidly decreasing solar activity, yet the
Corona had the features of a Sun-spot maximum. The same, though in a
somewhat less degree, may be said of the eclipses of 1885 and 1886. At
the times of both of these eclipses the solar activity was decreasing.

The forthcoming eclipse of 1900 will nearly coincide with a Sun-spot
minimum, and if the above conclusions are well founded the Corona in
1900 should resemble that of 1889, and be characterised by, amongst
other things, some very elongated groups of rays extending in nearly
opposite directions.

We are still a long way off from being able to state with perfect
confidence what the Corona is. It is certainly a complex phenomenon, and
the various streamers which we see are not, as was at one time imagined,
a simple manifestation of one radiant light. Mrs. Todd thus conveniently
summarises the present state of our knowledge:—“The true corona appears
to be a triple phenomenon. First, there are the polar rays, nearly
straight throughout their visible extent. Gradually, as these rays start
out from points on the solar disc farther and farther removed from the
poles, they acquire increasing curvature, and very probably extend into
the equatorial regions, but are with great difficulty traceable there,
because projected upon and confused with the filaments having their
origin remote from the poles. Then there is the inner equatorial corona,
apparently connected intimately with truly solar phenomena, quite like
the polar rays; while the third element in the composite is the outer
equatorial corona, made up of the long ecliptic streamers, for the most
part visible only to the naked eye, also existing as a solar appendage,
and possibly merging into the zodiacal light. The total eclipses of a
half century have cleared up a few obscurities, and added many
perplexities. There is little or no doubt about the substantial, if not
entire, reality of the corona as a truly solar phenomenon. The Moon, if
it has anything at all to do with the corona, aside from the fact of its
coming in conveniently between Sun and Earth, so as to allow a brief
glimpse of something startlingly beautiful which otherwise could never
have been known, is probably responsible for only a very narrow ring of
the inner radiance of pretty even breadth all round. This diffraction
effect is accepted; but the problem still remains how wide this annulus
may be, and whether it may vary in width from one eclipse to another.
These questions once settled, the spurious structure may then be
excerpted from the true. Indeed the coronal streamers, delicately
curving and interlacing, may tell the whole story of the Sun’s radiant
energy.”

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 16: There seems sufficient evidence to show that the
    Corona may be seen even on occasions when the Sun is not totally
    eclipsed, provided that the visible crescent of the Sun is
    exceedingly narrow.]

    [Footnote 17: See p. 130 (_post_).]




                             CHAPTER VII.

                WHAT IS OBSERVED AFTER THE TOTAL PHASE
                OF AN ECLIPSE OF THE SUN IS AT AN END.


In a certain sense, a description of the incidents which precede the
total disappearance of the Sun in connection with a total Eclipse will
apply more or less to the second half of the phenomenon; only, of
course, in the reverse order and on the opposite side of the compass.
The Corona having appeared first of all on the W. side of the Sun, then
having shown itself complete as surrounding the Sun, will begin to
disappear on the W. side, and will be last seen on the E. side. Baily’s
Beads may or may not come into view; the Sun will reappear first as a
very thin crescent, gradually widening; the quasi-nocturnal darkness
visible on the Earth will cease, and eventually the Moon will completely
pass away from off the Sun, and the Sun once again will exhibit a
perfect circle of light.

Whilst there is so much to look for and look at and think about, one
thing must be sought for instantly after totality, or it will be gone
for ever, and that is the Moon’s shadow on the Earth. We have already
seen in the last chapter the startling rapidity and solemnity with
which the shadow seems to rush forward to the observer from the horizon
on the western side of the Meridian. Passing over him, or even, so to
speak, through him, it travels onwards in an easterly direction and very
soon vanishes. Its visibility at all depends a good deal upon whether
the observer, who is looking for it, is sufficiently raised above the
adjacent country to be able to command at least a mile or two of ground.
If he is in a hollow, he will have but little chance of seeing the
shadow at all: on the other hand, if he is on the top of a considerable
hill (or high up on the side of a hill), commanding the horizon for a
distance of 10 or 20 miles, he will have a fair chance of seeing the
shadow. Sir G. B. Airy states, in 1851, “My eye was caught by a
duskiness in the S.E., and I immediately perceived that it was the
Eclipse-shadow in the air, travelling away in the direction of the
shadow’s path. For at least six seconds, this shadow remained in sight,
far more conspicuous to the eye than I had anticipated. I was once
caught in a very violent hail and thunder-storm on the Table-land of the
County of Sutherland called the “Moin,” and I at length saw the storm
travel away over the North Sea; and this view of the receding
Eclipse-shadow, though by no means so dark, reminded me strongly of the
receding storm. In ten or twelve seconds all appearance of the shadow
had passed away.”

Perhaps this may be a convenient place to make a note of what seems to
be a fact, partly established at any rate, even if not wholly
established, namely—that there seems some connection between eclipses
of the Sun and Earthquakes. A German physicist named Ginzel[18] has
found a score of coincidences between solar eclipses and earthquakes in
California in the years between 1850 and 1888 inclusive. Of course there
were eclipses without earthquakes and earthquakes without eclipses, but
twenty coincidences in thirty-eight years seems suggestive of something.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 18: _Himmel und Erde_, vol. ii. pp. 255, 309; 1890.]




                             CHAPTER VIII.

           ECLIPSES OF THE SUN MENTIONED IN HISTORY—CHINESE.


This is the first of several chapters which will be devoted to
historical eclipses. Of course the total eclipse of the Sun of August 9,
1896, observed in Norway and elsewhere, is, in a certain sense, an
eclipse mentioned in history, but that is not what is intended by the
title prefixed to these chapters. By the term “historical eclipses,” as
used here, I mean eclipses which have been recorded by ancient
historians and chroniclers who were not necessarily astronomers, and who
wrote before the invention of the telescope. The date of this may be
conveniently taken as a dividing line, so that I shall deal chiefly with
eclipses which occurred before, say, the year 1600. There is another
reason why some such date as this is a suitable one from which to take a
new departure. Without at all avowing that superstition ceased on the
Earth in the year 1600 (for there is far too large a residuum still
available now, 300 years later), it may yet be said that the Revival of
Letters did do a good deal to divest celestial phenomena of those
alarming and panic-causing attributes which undoubtedly attached to them
during the earlier ages of the world and during the “Dark Ages” in
Western Europe quite as much as during any other period of the world’s
history. No one can examine the writings of the ancient Greek and Roman
historians, and the chronicles kept in the monasteries of Western Europe
by their monkish occupiers, without being struck by the influence of
terror which such events as eclipses of the Sun and Moon and such
celestial visitors as Comets and Shooting Stars exercised far and wide.
And this influence overspread, not only the unlettered lower orders, but
many of those in far higher stations of life who, one might have hoped,
would have been exempt from such feelings of mental distress as they
often exhibited. Illustrations of this fact will be adduced in due
course.

It has always been supposed that the earliest recorded eclipse of the
Sun is one thus mentioned in an ancient Chinese classic—the _Chou-King_
(sometimes spelt _Shou-Ching_). The actual words used may be
translated:—“On the first day of the last month of Autumn the Sun and
Moon did not meet harmoniously in Fang.” To say the least of it, this is
a moderately ambiguous announcement, and Chinese scholars, both
astronomers and non-astronomers, have spent a good deal of time in
examining the various eclipses which might be thought to be represented
by the inharmonious meeting of the Sun and the Moon as above recorded.
To cut a long story short, it is generally agreed that we are here
considering one or other of two eclipses of the Sun which occurred in
the years 2136 or 2128 B.C. respectively, the Sun being then in the
sidereal division “Fang,” a locality determined by the stars β, δ, π,
and ρ Scorpii, and which includes a few small stars in Libra and
Ophiuchus to the N. and in Lupus to the S. How this simple and neat
conclusion, which I have stated with such apparent dogmatism, was
arrived at is quite another question, and it would hardly be consistent
with the purpose of this volume to attempt to work it out in detail, but
a few points presented in a summary form may be interesting.

In the first place, be it understood, that though it is fashionable to
cast ridicule on John Chinaman, especially by way of retaliation for his
calling us “Barbarians,” yet it is a sure and certain fact that not only
have the Chinese during many centuries been very attentive students of
Astronomy, but that we Westerns owe a good deal of our present knowledge
in certain departments to the information stored up by Chinese observers
during many centuries both before and after the Christian Era.

This, however, is a digression. The circumstances of this eclipse as
regards its identification having been carefully examined by Mr. R. W.
Rothman,[19] in 1839 were further reviewed by Professor S. M. Russell
in a paper published in the proceedings of the Pekin Oriental
Society.[20] The substance of the case is that in the reign of
Chung-K’ang, the fourth Emperor of the Hsia Dynasty, there occurred an
eclipse of the Sun, which is interesting not only for its antiquity, but
also for the dread fate of the two Astronomers Royal of the period, who
were taken by surprise at its occurrence, and were unprepared to perform
the customary rites. These rites were the shooting of arrows and the
beating of drums, gongs, etc., with the object of delivering the Sun
from the monster which threatened to devour it. The two astronomers by
virtue of their office should have superintended these rites. They were,
however, drunk and incapable of performing their duties, so that great
turmoil ensued, and it was considered that the land was exposed to the
anger of the gods. By way of appeasing the gods, and of suitably
punishing the two State officials for their neglect and personal
misconduct, they were forthwith put to death, a punishment which may be
said to have been somewhat excessive, in view of the fact that the
eclipse was not a total but only a partial one. An anonymous verse
runs:—

    Here lie the bodies of Ho and Hi,
      Whose fate though sad was visible—
    Being hanged because they could not spy
      Th’ eclipse which was invisible.

It appears beyond all reasonable doubt that the eclipse in question
occurred on October 22, 2136 B.C. The preliminary difficulties to be
got over in arriving at the date arose from the fact that there was an
uncertainty of 108 years in the date when the Emperor Chung-K’ang
ascended the throne; and within these limits of time there were 14
possible years in which an eclipse of the Sun in Fang could have
occurred. Then the number was further limited by the necessity of
finding an eclipse which could have been seen at the place which was the
Emperor’s capital. The site of this, again, was a matter of some
uncertainty. However, step by step, by a judicious process of
exhaustion, the year 2136 B.C. was arrived at as the alternative to the
previously received date of 2128 B.C. Considering that we are dealing
with a matter which happened full 4000 years ago, it may fairly be said
that this discrepancy is not perhaps much to be wondered at, seeing what
disputes often happen nowadays as to the precise date of events which
may have occurred but a few years or even a few months before the
controversy springs up.

Professor Russell says that:—“Some admirers of the Chinese cite this
eclipse as a proof of the early proficiency attained by the Chinese in
astronomical calculations. I find no ground for that belief in the text.
Indeed, for many centuries later, the Chinese were unable to predict the
position of the Sun accurately among the stars. They relied wholly on
observation to settle their calendar, year by year, and seem to have
drawn no conclusions or deductions from their observations. Their
calendar was continually falling into confusion. Even at the beginning
of this dynasty, when the Jesuits came to China, the Chinese
astronomers were unable to calculate accurately the length of the shadow
of the Sun at the equinoxes and solstices. It seems to me therefore very
improbable that they could have been able to calculate and predict
eclipses.”

I am not at all sure that this is quite a fair presentation of the case.
I do not remember ever to have seen the power to predict eclipses
ascribed to the Chinese, but it is a simple matter of fact that we owe
to them during many centuries unique records of a vast number of
celestial phenomena. Their observations of comets may be singled out as
having been of inestimable value to various 19th-century computers,
especially E. Biot and J. R. Hind.

The second recorded eclipse of the Sun would seem to be also due to the
Chinese. Confucius relates that during the reign of the Emperor Yew-Wang
an eclipse took place. This Emperor reigned between 781 B.C. and 771
B.C., and it has been generally thought that the eclipse of 775 B.C. is
the one referred to, but Johnson doubts this on the ground that this
eclipse was chiefly visible in the circumpolar regions, and if seen at
all in China must have been of very small dimensions. He leans to the
eclipse of June 4, 780 B.C. as the only large one which happened within
the limits of time stated above.

An ancient Chinese historical work, known as the _Chun-Tsew_, written by
Confucius, makes mention of a large number of solar eclipses which
occurred before the Christian Era. This work came under the notice of M.
Gaubil, one of the French Jesuit missionaries who laboured in China
some century and a half ago, and he first gave an account of it in his
_Traité de la Chronologie Chinoise_, published at Paris in 1770.[21]

The _Chun-Tsew_ is said to be the only work really written by
Kung-Foo-Tze, commonly known as Confucius, the other treatises
attributed to him having been compiled by disciples of his either during
his life-time or after his decease. The German chronologist, Ideler, was
acquainted with this work, and in a paper of his own, presented to the
Berlin Academy, remarked:—“What gives great interest to this work is the
account of 36 solar eclipses observed in China, the first of which was
on Feb. 22, 720 B.C., and the last on July 22, 495 B.C.”

In 1863 Mr. John Williams, then Assistant Secretary of the Royal
Astronomical Society, communicated to the Society in a condensed form
the particulars of these eclipses as related in Confucius’s book,
together with some remarks on the book itself. The _Chun-Tsew_ treats of
a part of the history of the confederated nations into which China was
divided during the Chow Dynasty, that is between 1122 B.C. and 255 B.C.
The particular period dealt with is that which extended from 722 B.C. to
479 B.C. It was during the latter part of this interval of about 242
years that Confucius flourished. But the book is not quite a general
history for it is more particularly devoted to the small State of Loo
of which Confucius was a native, where he passed a great portion of his
life, and where he was advanced to the highest honours. It contains the
history of twelve princes of this State with incidental notices of the
other confederated nations. The number of the years of each reign is
accurately determined, and the events are classed under the years in
which they occurred. Each year is divided into sections according to the
four seasons, Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter, and the sections are
subdivided into months, and often the days are distinguished. The name
_Chun-Tsew_ is said to have been given to this work from its having been
commenced in Spring and finished in Autumn, but Williams thinks that the
name rather refers to the fact that its contents are divided into
seasons as stated. The style in which it is written is very concise,
being a bare mention of facts without comment, and although on this
account it might appear to us dry and uninteresting, it is much valued
by the Chinese as a model of the ancient style of writing. It forms one
of the _Woo-King_ or Five Classical Books, without a thorough knowledge
of which, and of the _Sze-Shoo_ or Four Books, no man can attain to any
post of importance in the Chinese Empire.

The account of each eclipse is but little more than a brief mention of
its occurrence at a certain time. The following is an example of the
entries:—“In the 58th year of the 32nd cycle in the 51st year of the
Emperor King-Wang, of the Chow Dynasty, the 3rd year of Yin-Kung, Prince
of Loo, in the spring, the second moon, on the day called Kea-Tsze,
there was an eclipse of the Sun.” This 58th year of the 32nd cycle
answers to 720 B.C. Mr. Williams in the year 1863 presented to the Royal
Astronomical Society a paper setting out the whole of the eclipses of
which I have cited but one example, converting, of course, the very
complicated Chinese dates into European dates.

These Chinese records of eclipses were in 1864 subjected to examination
by the late Sir G. B. Airy,[22] with results which were highly
noteworthy, and justify us in reposing much confidence in Chinese
astronomical work. Airy remarks:—“The period through which these
eclipses extend is included in the time through which calculations of
eclipses have been made in the French work entitled _L’Art de vérifier
les Dates_. I have several times had occasion to recalculate with great
accuracy eclipses which are noted in that work (edition of 1820), and I
have found that, to the limits of accuracy to which it pretends, and
which are abundantly sufficient for the present purpose, it is perfectly
trustworthy. I have therefore made a comparison of the _Chun-Tsew_
eclipses with those of _L’Art de vérifier les Dates_. The result is
interesting. Of the 36 eclipses, 32 agree with those of the _Art de
vérifier les Dates_, not only in the day, but also in the general track
of the eclipse as given in the _Art de vérifier_, which appears to show
sufficiently that the eclipse would be visible in that province of China
to which the _Chun-Tsew_ is referred.” Airy then proceeds to point out
that, with regard to the four eclipses which he could not confirm, there
cannot have been eclipses in April 645 B.C. or in June 592 B.C. It
appears, however, from a note by Williams, that the date attached to the
eclipse of 645 B.C. is, in reality, an erroneous repetition (in the
Chinese mode of expressing it) of that attached to the next following
one, and in the absence of correct date it must be rejected. In the
record of 592 B.C., June 16, no clerical error is found, and there must
be an error of a different class. The eclipses of 552 B.C., September
19, and 549 B.C., July 18, to which there is nothing corresponding in
the _Art de vérifier_, are in a different category. These occur in the
lunations immediately succeeding 552 B.C., August 20, and 549 B.C., June
19, respectively, and there is no doubt that those which agree with the
_Art de vérifier_ were real eclipses. Now there cannot be eclipses
visible at the same place in successive lunations, because the
difference of the Moon’s longitudes is about 29°, and the difference of
latitudes is therefore nearly 3°, which is greater than the sum of the
diameters of the Sun and Moon increased by any possible change of
parallax for the same place. These, therefore, were not real eclipses.
It seems probable that the nominal days were set down by the observer in
his memorandum book as days on which eclipses were to be looked for.
Airy conjectured that the eclipses of 552 B.C., August 20, and 549 B.C.,
June 19, were observed by one and the same person, and that he possessed
science enough to make him connect the solar eclipses with the change
of the Moon, but not enough to give him any idea of the limitations to
the visibility of an eclipse.

On a subsequent occasion Mr. Williams laid before the Society a further
list of solar eclipses observed in China, and extending from 481 B.C. to
the Christian Era. He collected these from a Chinese historical work,
entitled _Tung-Keen-Kang-Muh_. This work, which runs to 101 volumes,
contains a summary of Chinese history from the earliest times to the end
of the Yuen Dynasty, A.D. 1368, and was first published about 1473. The
copy in Mr. Williams’s possession was published in 1808. The text is
very briefly worded, and consists merely of an account of the accessions
and deaths of the emperors and of the rulers of the minor states, with
some of the more remarkable occurrences in each reign. The appointments
and deaths of various eminent personages are also noticed, together with
special calamities such as earthquakes, inundations, storms, etc. The
astronomical allusions include eclipses and comets. Amongst the eclipses
are also all, or most of those which are recorded in the _Chun-Tsew_ as
having occurred prior to 479 B.C. Though no particular expressions are
used to define the exact character of the eclipses, it is to be presumed
that some of them must have been total, because it is stated that the
stars were visible, albeit that seemingly in only one instance is a word
attached which specifically expresses the idea of totality. Here again
all the dates were expressed in Chinese style, but, as published by
Williams, were rendered, as before, in European style by aid of
chronological tables, published about 1860 in Japan. Mr. Williams, in
his second paper, from which I have been quoting, states that he brought
his published account down to the Christian Era only as a matter of
convenience, but that he had in hand a further selection of eclipses
from the _Tung-Keen-Kang-Muh_, the interval from the Christian Era to
the 4th century A.D. yielding nearly 100 additional eclipses. This
further transcript has not yet been published, but remains in MS. in the
Library of the Royal Astronomical Society. Mr. Williams died in 1874 at
the age of 77, one of the most experienced Chinese scholars of the
century.

It is remarkable that none of the Chinese annals to which reference has
been made include any mention of eclipses of the Moon; but the records
of Comets are exceedingly numerous and, as I have already stated, have
proved of the highest value to astronomers who have been called upon to
investigate the ancient history of Comets.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 19: _Memoirs_, R.A.S., vol. xi. p. 47.]

    [Footnote 20: Republished in the _Observatory_ Magazine, vol. xviii.
    p. 323, _et seq._, 1895.]

    [Footnote 21: A good deal of information respecting Chinese eclipse
    records, so far as known up to the beginning of the 19th-century,
    will be found in Delambre’s _Histoire de l’Astronomie Ancienne_.
    Paris, 1817.]

    [Footnote 22: _Month. Not._, R.A.S., vol. xxiv. p. 41.]




                              CHAPTER IX.

                 ARE ECLIPSES ALLUDED TO IN THE BIBLE?


An interesting question has been suggested: Are there any allusions to
eclipses to be found in Holy Scripture? It seems safe to assert that
there is at least one, and that there may be three or four.

In Amos viii. 9 we read:—“I will cause the Sun to go down at noon, and I
will darken the Earth in the clear day.” This language is so very
explicit and applies so precisely to the circumstances of a solar
eclipse that commentators are generally agreed that it can have but one
meaning;[23] and accordingly it is considered to refer without doubt to
one or other of the following eclipses:—791 B.C., 771 B.C., 770 B.C., or
763 B.C. Archbishop Usher,[24] the well-known chronologist, suggested
the first three more than two centuries ago, whilst the eclipse of 763
B.C. was suggested in recent times and is now generally accepted as the
one referred to. The circumstances connected with the discovery and
identification of the eclipse of 763 B.C. are very interesting.

The date when Amos wrote is set down in the margin of our Bibles as 787
B.C. and if this date is correct it follows that for his statement to
have been a prediction he must be alluding to some eclipse of later date
than 787 B.C. This obvious assumption not only shuts out the eclipse of
791 B.C., but opens the door to the acceptance of the eclipse of 763
B.C.

Apparently the first modern writer who looked into the matter after
Archbishop Usher was the German commentator Hitzig who suggested the
eclipse of Feb. 9, 784 B.C. Dr. Pusey was so far taken with this idea
that he thought it worth while to secure the co-operation of the Rev. R.
Main, F.R.A.S., the Radcliffe Observer at Oxford, for the purpose of a
full investigation. Mr. Main had the circumstances of that eclipse
calculated, with the result that though the eclipse was indeed total in
Africa and Hindostan, yet at Samaria it was only partial and of no
considerable magnitude. Dr. Pusey’s words, summing up the situation
are:—“The eclipse then would hardly have been noticeable at Samaria,
certainly very far indeed from being an eclipse of such magnitude, as
could in any degree correspond with the expression, ‘I will cause the
Sun to go down at noon.’” ... “Beforehand, one should not have expected
that an eclipse of the Sun, being itself a regular natural phenomenon,
and having no connection with the moral government of God, should have
been the subject of the prophet’s prediction. Still it had a religious
impressiveness then, above what it has now, on account of that
wide-prevailing idolatry of the Sun. It exhibited the object of their
false worship, shorn of its light, and passive.”

Dr. Pusey’s _Commentary_ from which the above quotation is made[25]
bears the date 1873, but he appears not to have been acquainted with the
important discovery announced no less than six years previously by the
distinguished Oriental scholar, Sir H. C. Rawlinson. The discovery to
which I allude is a contemporary record on an Assyrian tablet of a solar
eclipse which was seen at Nineveh about 24 years after the reputed date
of Amos’s prophecy. This tablet had been described by Dr. Hinckes in the
British Museum _Report_ for 1854 but its chronological importance had
not then been realised. Sir H. Rawlinson[26] speaks of the tablet as a
record of or register of the annual archons at Nineveh. He says:—“In the
eighteenth year before the accession of Tiglath-Pileser there is a
notice to the following effect—‘In the month Sivan an eclipse of the Sun
took place’ and to mark the great importance of the event a line is
drawn across the tablet although no interruption takes place in the
official order of the Eponymes. Here then we have notice of a solar
eclipse which was visible at Nineveh which occurred within 90 days of
the (vernal) equinox (taking that as the normal commencement of the
year) and which we may presume to have been total from the prominence
given to the record, and these are conditions which during a century
before and after the era of Nabonassar are alone fulfilled by the
eclipse which took place on June 15, 763.”

This record was submitted to Sir G. B. Airy and Mr. J. R. Hind, and the
circumstances of the eclipse were computed by the latter, by the aid of
Hansen’s Lunar Tables and Le Verrier’s Solar Tables. The result, when
plotted on a map, showed that the shadow line just missed the site of
Nineveh, but that a very slight and unimportant deviation from the
result of the Tables would bring the shadow over the city of Nineveh
where the eclipse was observed, and over Samaria where it was predicted.
The identification of this eclipse, both as regards its time and place,
has also proved a matter of importance in the revision of Scripture
chronology, by lowering, to the extent of 25 years, the reigns of the
kings of the Jewish monarchy. The need for this revision is further
confirmed, if we assume that the celebrated incident in the life of King
Hezekiah, described as the retrogradation of the Sun’s shadow on the
dial of Ahaz, is to be interpreted as connected with a partial eclipse
of the Sun.

We will now consider this event, and see what can be made out of it. One
Scripture record (2 Kings xx. 11) is as follows:—“And Isaiah the prophet
cried unto the Lord: and he brought the shadow ten degrees backward, by
which it had gone down in the dial of Ahaz.” This passage has greatly
exercised commentators of all creeds in different ages of the Church;
and the most divergent opinions have been expressed as to what happened.
This has been due to two causes jointly. Not only is the occurrence
incomprehensible, looked at on the surface of the words, but we are
entirely ignorant of the construction of the so-called “dial” of Ahaz,
and have little or no material directly available from outside sources
to enable us to come to a clear and safe conclusion. No doubt, however,
it was a sun-dial, or gnomon of some kind. Bishop Wordsworth lays stress
on the apparent assertion that the miracle was not wrought on any other
dial at Jerusalem except that of Ahaz, the father of Hezekiah, and he
treats as a confirmation of this the statement in 2 Chron. xxxii. 31,
that ambassadors came from Babylon to Jerusalem, being curious to learn
all about “the wonder that had been done in the land” (_i.e._ in the
land of Judah). But there is more taken for granted here than is
necessary, or, as we shall presently see, is justifiable. To begin with,
how do we know that there was any other dial at Jerusalem like that of
Ahaz? But, in point of fact, we must make a new departure altogether,
for it has been suggested (I know not exactly by whom, or when for the
first time) that an eclipse of the Sun, under certain circumstances,
would explain all that happened, and reconcile all that has to be
reconciled. What happened to Hezekiah is thought by many to imply
clearly a miracle, and it may be said that an eclipse of the Sun cannot
be held to be a miracle[27] by the ordinary definition of the word. But,
on the other hand, it certainly might count as such in the eyes of
ignorant spectators, who know nothing of the theory or practice of
eclipses, and who would regard such a thing as quite unforeseen,
unexpected, and alarming. Illustrations of this might be multiplied from
all parts of the world, in all ages of the world’s history.

Let us see now what the argument is, as it was worked out by the late
Mr. J. W. Bosanquet, F.R.A.S. Shortly before the invasion of Judæa by
Sennacherib—say in the beginning of the year 689 B.C.—Hezekiah was sick
unto death. In answer to his fervent prayer for recovery the prophet
Isaiah was sent to him with this message:—“Thus saith the Lord, the God
of David thy Father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears;
behold, I will add unto thy days fifteen years ... and I will defend
this city, and this shall be a sign unto thee from the Lord, that the
Lord will do this thing that He hath spoken. Behold, I will bring again
the shadow of the degrees, which is gone down in the sun-dial of Ahaz
ten degrees backward. So the Sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees
it had gone down.” (Isaiah xxxviii. 5-8).

In these words we evidently have mention of some instrument erected in
Hezekiah’s palace, in the days of his father Ahaz, for showing the
change in the position of the shadow cast by the Sun from day to day.
This statement is confirmed by a profane writer, Glycas, who states:
“They say that Ahaz, by some contrivance, had erected in his palace
certain steps, which showed the hours of the day, and also measured the
course of the Sun.”

The idea involved in “bringing again,” through “ten degrees backward,”
“the shadow of the degrees” which had gone down, is very noteworthy. We
seem intended to learn from these words several things. For one thing
(to begin with) that the steps (as we must consider them to have been)
on this sun-dial of Ahaz, were turned away from the Sun. For only in
that position could they cast their shadow, or could the number of the
illuminated steps be varied, upwards or downwards, according to the
varying altitude of the sun. The only conceivable use of a fixed
instrument so placed would be to show the rise and fall of the shadow
from day to day, as the Sun on the meridian gradually rose higher
between mid-winter and mid-summer, or descended lower between mid-summer
and mid-winter, in passing of course through the winter and summer
solstices in turn. No simple motion of the Sun in its ordinary diurnal
progress would produce the effect described. On the other hand, it is
equally clear that the shadow cast by a gnomon properly adjusted at the
head of such a series of steps would travel upwards and downwards upon
the steps “with the Sun,” from winter to summer and from summer to
winter, indicating at each noon the meridian altitude of the Sun from
day to day, the latitude of Jerusalem being 31° 47′, and the Sun’s
altitude there on the shortest day being 34° 41′. If the gnomon were
raised above the topmost step so as to bring the tip of the gnomon or
any aperture in it so much above the step as would be the equivalent of
2° 54′ or slightly more, then the top of the shadow of the gnomon (or a
spot of light passing through a hole in it) would, on the shortest day
of the year, fall just beyond the lowermost step. An instrument
constructed on the principle just set forth was known to and used by the
Greek astronomers of antiquity under the name of a _Sciotheron_ or
shadow-taker. Sometimes, and perhaps more properly, it was called a
_Heliotropion_, that is, an instrument designed to indicate the turning
of the Sun at the Tropics.[28] This, be it remembered, was information
needed by the ancients for the correct regulation of the seasons of the
year, and of special service to the Jews whose greater festivals were
fixed in connection with the seasons. There is reason to believe that
instruments of this character were of early invention, going back
perhaps to the times of Homer, for we find a passage in the _Odyssey_,
(xv. 403) as follows:—

    “Above Ortygia lies an isle of fame
    Far hence remote, and Syria [Syros] is the name;
    There curious eyes inscrib’d with wonder trace
    The Sun’s diurnal and his summer race.”

Pope’s rendering of this passage fails, however, to bring out the
salient idea involved. Butcher and Lang translate the passage
thus:—“There is a certain isle called Syria, if haply thou hast heard
tell of it, over above Ortygia, and there are the turning-places of the
Sun.” Merry[29] calls these island names mere “inventions of the poet.”
It seems to me a great question whether Homer’s words really support the
statement I have made just before quoting it.

Diogenes Laërtius refers to this same instrument when he speaks of the
Heliotropion preserved in the Island of Syra.[30]

According to Laërtius, Anaximander[31] was the first Greek to use
gnomons, which he placed on the Sciothera of Lacedæmon, for the express
purpose of indicating the Tropics and Equinoxes. These Sciothera were
pyramidal in form.

An obelisk was the simplest, though an imperfect form of Heliotropion,
marking indistinctly the length of a shadow at different times of the
year, especially the extremes of length and shortness at mid-winter and
mid-summer. It is perhaps interesting to mention that travellers have
recorded, in various places, various devices for furnishing information
respecting these matters. For instance, in Milan Cathedral the meridian
line is marked on the pavement, and along this line, an image of the Sun
coming through an aperture in the southern wall travels backwards and
forwards during the year according to the seasons. Some Jesuit
missionaries who visited China about the middle of the last century,
noticed a device of this character in operation at the Observatory at
Pekin. A gnomon had been set up in a low room and one of the
missionaries, M. Le Comte, describes in the following words what they
saw in connection with this gnomon:—“The aperture through which the rays
of the Sun came was about 8 ft. above the floor; it is horizontal and
formed of two pieces of copper, which may be turned so as to be farther
from, or closer to, each other to enlarge or contract the aperture.
Lower was a table with a brass plate in the middle on which was traced a
meridian line 15 ft. long, divided by transverse lines which are neither
finished nor exact. All round the table there are small channels to
receive the water, whereby it is to be levelled.”[32]

All this may seem rather a digression, and so it is, but I am following
Mr. Bosanquet herein in order the better to justify the argument that
it was an eclipse of the Sun which marked the important incident in
Hezekiah’s life which has been handed down to us by the sacred writer.
It is evident that if a flight of steps were erected on the principles
which were set forth above, the steps sloping upwards and southwards
(for the Northern Hemisphere) from the lowest step to within a few
inches below an aperture in the gnomon suitably arranged, the ray or
image of the Sun, whichever it was, would travel day by day up and down
such steps between solstice and solstice. We may conclude, therefore,
that the instrument which Hezekiah gazed at, and which is called in
Scripture, the “Dial” of Ahaz, was what the Greeks would have termed a
Heliotropion.

The historian’s record is to the effect that on the day of Hezekiah’s
recovery an extraordinary motion of the shadow was observed on the
“Steps of Ahaz” by the rising of the shadow “ten steps” from the point
to which it had “gone down with the Sun.” This effect is spoken of not
as a miracle but as “a sign.” It should also be remembered that the cure
of Hezekiah was effected not by a miracle but by a simple application of
a lump of figs. The promise of his recovery was confirmed by the motion
of the shadow as already stated. We are justified, therefore, in looking
for some ordinary natural phenomenon by which to account for this
peculiar motion on the dial, and something miraculous is not essential.
Dean Milman once suggested that the effect might have been produced “by
a cloud refracting the light.” No doubt a dark cloud might produce an
apparent interference with the shadow, but it is well pointed out by
Bosanquet that such a cause as a cloud would have been so manifest to
everyone, and the effect so transient, that the phenomenon could hardly
have been referred to afterwards as it was in another place as “a wonder
that was done in the land.” (2 Chron. xxxii. 31).

It becomes, therefore, alike an obvious and a simple explanation that a
shadow caused by the Sun might be deflected downwards on such an
instrument with a regular and steady motion by the Moon passing slowly
over the upper part of the Sun’s disc, as Sun and Moon both approached
the meridian.

The critical question has now to be raised: “Can astronomers inform us
whether a considerable eclipse of the Sun occurred at the beginning of
the year 689 B.C. anywhere near noon and which was visible at
Jerusalem?” And the answer to this it is interesting to be able to say
is a plain and distinct affirmative. There was a large partial eclipse
of the Sun on January 11, 689 B.C., about 11.30 A.M., and it was the
upper limb which underwent eclipse.

This eclipse fulfils all the requirements of the case, both from the
historian’s and the astronomer’s point of view. It occurred about the
year fixed by Demetrius as that of Hezekiah’s illness: it occurred while
the Sun was approaching and actually passing the meridian; the
obscuration was on that part of the Sun’s disc (namely the upper part)
which would have had the effect of causing the point of light, which
would seem to emanate from the Sun, to appear to be depressed downwards;
and it was visible at Jerusalem. But there still remains for
consideration the final and most important question, “Would a deflection
of light proceeding from the Sun, regarded as a moving body, be capable
of affecting, to the extent of ‘ten steps,’ the shadow on such an
instrument as has been described?” And arising out of this, there is the
subordinate question, “Would January, being the month when this eclipse
certainly occurred, also be a month suitable for the exhibition of such
a phenomenon?”

It is ascertainable by calculation that the time occupied by the Moon in
passing over the Sun, in the way it did during this eclipse, was about
2½ hours. But from the time of central conjunction, when the
obscuration was the greatest and the point of light depressed the most,
to the time when the uppermost portion of the Sun’s disc was released by
the eastward motion of the Moon, and the light from that uppermost
portion was again manifest, was about 20 minutes, and this, therefore,
was the time during which the phenomenon of retrogression on the “steps”
would have been exhibited to the King’s eyes. Assuming then that the
time when the ascending shadow had travelled upwards to the tenth step
coincided, or nearly so, with the time when the Sun had reached its
highest altitude for the day, at noon, we infer that the time of central
conjunction during this eclipse was not later than from 20 to 15
minutes before noon. It could not have been much earlier, because the
phenomenon of the resting of the shadow for a time at its _apparently_
highest point for the day (which preceded the promise that it should
rise ten steps) has also to be accounted for, and this cessation of its
motion upwards could not have taken place till about 25 minutes before
noon, when the decreasing motion of the Sun in altitude (or its
slackening motion upwards as it approached mid-day) would have become
counteracted by the coming on of the eclipse. Now at 11.35 A.M. the
sun’s disc would have risen to the altitude of 35° 8′; and the highest
visible point of light would, owing to the eclipse, then have been about
35° 4′; and at 11.40 A.M., being the time of greatest obscuration, the
extreme cusps of light produced by the intervention of the Moon would
still have stood at about 35° 4′, just 23′ below the highest point of
light at noon (Fig. 12). _The whole disc of the sun had now risen above
the gnomon, yet no motion of the shadow on the steps had been observed
for fully five minutes. The time shown by the dial was seemingly
mid-day._

[Illustration: FIG. 12.—ECLIPSE OF THE SUN, JANUARY 11, 689 B.C., AT
JERUSALEM.]

Sun’s apparent semi-diameter 16′ 13″
Moon’s  "       "            15′ 13″
Moon’s relative hourly motion in declination 5′ 44″ northward.
Right ascension, 29′ 33″ eastward.
Corrected for Jerusalem, 19′ 42″ eastward.
Altitude of the Gnomon, 34° 41′ 13″.

SUN’S ALTITUDE BEFORE AND AT NOON.

[Illustration: Phase at 20 minutes before noon.]

[Illustration: Phase at noon.]

We have now to consider “to what extent would a staircase rising at an
angle of 31° 47′ towards the Sun, with a gnomon so placed at the top as
to cast a shadow to the foot of the lower step on the shortest day of
the year be affected by a movement in a perpendicular direction of the
point of light to the extent of 23′, or ⅓ of a degree”? The effect would
be widely different at different times of the year, being greatest at
mid-winter when the shadows are longest, and least at mid-summer when
the shadows are shortest. It follows from this that January 13 being a
day but three weeks removed from mid-winter day the normal shadow would
be not far from its longest possible length, and the effect of a
displacement of 23′ would be neither more nor less than 1/12th of the
whole range of the steps whatever that range might have been. This
extent of motion, then, is fully sufficient to satisfy the condition
prescribed by the Biblical narrative of there being such a deflection of
the Sun’s light as would affect the shadow to the extent implied by the
words “ten steps” or “ten degrees,” which is virtually the same idea.
The same extent of motion could not have been produced under the same
conditions either a few days earlier or a few days later; that may
certainly be taken for granted. And the only point in which we are
necessarily in doubt arises from the fact that we are ignorant of the
actual number and nature of the graduations of Ahaz’s so-called “Dial.”
If it were permissible to assume that there were 120 graduations on the
instrument, be they steps properly so-called on a structure erected in
the open air or be they lines on a flat surface on some instrument
standing in a room, or what not, then the problem is solved, for 1/12
(as above) of 120 is ten—the “ten degrees” stated in the history.

As to whether the “dial” of Ahaz was a device built up of masonry in the
open air or was an instrument for indoor use we know absolutely nothing,
and speculation is useless. There is something to be said on both sides.
Bosanquet, on abstract grounds, leans to the latter view; on the other
hand he calls attention to the present existence in India, at Delhi and
Benares, of ruined Hindoo observatories in the form of huge masonry
sun-dials many yards in length and breadth and height.[33]

Finally it may be pointed out that there is some incidental confirmation
to be found for this Hezekiah incident having happened in winter. That
the season of the year was winter seems to be suggested by the word used
in the original Hebrew in connection with the return of the shadow.

“Backward” in Isaiah xxxviii. 8 might also be translated, “From the
end.” It would be very natural to hold that this implied that the motion
of the shadow was upwards from the _lower_ end of the group of steps
towards which the shadow had gone down. Now the lower end of the steps
could only have been the place of the shadow in December or January at
or near the time of the winter solstice. Moreover the mention of the
“lump of figs” seems to suggest the winter season. A cake of figs means
dried figs, not newly gathered summer figs.

Putting all the facts together we may fairly conclude that the
astronomical event which happened in connection with Hezekiah’s illness
was an eclipse of the Sun, and that its date was January 11, 689 B.C.

A few other Scripture passages need a passing mention. In Isaiah xiii.
10 we read:—

“The Sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the Moon shall not
cause her light to shine.” It has been thought by Johnson that this
passage is an allusion to an eclipse of the Sun, and so it might be; but
on the other hand, it may be no more than one of those highly figurative
phrases which abound in holy Scripture, and of which the well-known
passage, “The stars in their courses fought against Sisera” (Judges v.
20), is a familiar example.

In Jeremiah x. 2 we read:—

“Be not dismayed at the signs of heaven; for the heathen are dismayed at
them.” This is cited as an eclipse allusion by Johnson, who points out
that the utterance of this caution preceded by about fifteen years the
celebrated eclipse of Thales (585 B.C.). But surely this is far-fetched.
I shall be inclined to attach the same criticism to his next citation.
Ezekiel employs these expressions:—“When I shall put thee out, I will
cover the heaven, and make the stars thereof dark; I will cover the Sun
with a cloud, and the Moon shall not give her light” (xxxii. 7). This
language resembles, in no small degree, Isaiah’s, already quoted, and,
like that, _might_ apply to the phenomenon of a solar eclipse, but
whether that was actually the prophet’s intention is another matter. He
may have witnessed the eclipse of 585 B.C. on the banks of the river
Chebar, and that spectacle may have put this imagery into his head.
Further than this it seems hardly safe to go.

This seems an appropriate place to mention a very interesting matter, to
which attention has been called by Oriental scholars in recent times,
who have investigated Assyrian and Egyptian monuments, and other
monuments of the same type. The story would be a long and interesting
one if presented in detail, and would far exceed my limits of space. I
must, therefore, be content with such a summary as that which has been
worked out by Mr. E. W. Maunder. Briefly the facts are these. There are
to be found in many places carvings in stone, symbolic of the Sun-god
once worshipped in the East. The general design, with of course
variations, is a circle with striated wings extending right and left to
two diameters of the wing, more or less, with a lesser extension in a
downward direction. Allowing for the roughness of the art, and for the
fact that the material was stone, it does not require any very great
stretch of imagination to see in these carvings the disc of a
totally-eclipsed Sun with, right and left and below it, that form of
corona which we have come to associate with total eclipses occurring at
periods of Sun-spot minima.[34] This idea should not seem far-fetched if
we bear in mind the fact that the ancient Orientals worshipped the Sun,
Moon, and Planets; and one of the natural outcomes of this is submitted
for our consideration by Maunder in the words following[35]:—

“There can be little doubt that the Sun was regarded partly as a symbol,
partly as a manifestation of the unseen, unapproachable Divinity. Its
light and heat, its power of calling into active exercise the
mysterious forces of germination and ripening, the universality of its
influence, all seemed the fit expressions of the yet greater powers
which belonged to the Invisible. What happened in a total solar eclipse?
For a short time that which seemed so perfect a divine symbol was
completely hidden. The light and heat, the two great forms of solar
energy, were withdrawn, but something took their place. A mysterious
light of mysterious form, unlike any other light, unlike any other
single form, was seen in its place. Could they fail to see in this a
closer, a more intimate revelation, a more exalted symbolism of the
Divine Nature and Presence? Just as in the various Greek ‘mysteries’ the
student was gradually advanced from one set of symbols to another even
more abstruse and esoteric, so here, on the broad face of heaven itself,
vouchsafed for a brief space of time and at long intervals apart, the
Deity revealed Himself to the initiated by a higher and more difficult
symbol than ordinarily. The symbol would vary in shape. We may take it
for granted that the old Chaldeans, as modern astronomers to-day, had at
one time or another presented to them every type of Coronal structure.
But there would, no doubt, be a difficulty in grasping or remembering
the irregular details of the Corona as seen in most eclipses. It
occasionally happens, however, that the Corona shows itself under a form
of grand and striking simplicity. It is now widely recognised that the
typical Corona of the minimum of the Sun-spot cycle consists chiefly of
two great equatorial streamers.”

Maunder then goes on to cite certain American pictures by Trouvelot and
others of the eclipse of July 29, 1878, in which the great extension of
the Corona to the East and the West is specially shown. One drawing in
particular, by Miss K. E. Wolcott, exhibits the Sun with a perfect
bright ring round it from which the Coronal streamers emanate in the
directions mentioned. Maunder then remarks that he has a strong
conviction that it was a Corona of this type which was the origin of the
“Ring with Wings,” the symbol which on Assyrian monuments is always
shown as floating over the head of the ring which is designed to
indicate the presence and protection of the Deity. In the article cited
he gives illustrations of two forms under which the “Ring with Wings”
appears on Assyrian and Egyptian monuments respectively, remarking that
“Egyptians too were Astronomers and Sun-worshippers and were experts in
the language of symbols. Equally with the Chaldeans the Egyptian priests
should have regarded the Corona as a symbolical revelation of the Deity
whose usual manifestation they recognised in the Sun, and accordingly we
find them employing a symbol which is almost as perfect a representation
of the Corona of minimum as that which the Assyrians adopted.” Another
curious point commented upon by Maunder is that the Assyrians frequently
insert the figure of their Deity within the ring, and attach thereto a
kilt-like dress. Even when they show the ring without the figure the
“kilt,” as it may be called, is still there, indicating that it is not
simply a garment worn by the figure, but an integral part of the
symbol. This “kilt” is represented as pleated, and the resemblance of
the pleatings to the polar rays shown in Trouvelot’s drawing of the
Corona, is “practically perfect.” On this point Maunder adds:—“If this
be a mere chance coincidence, it seems to me a most extraordinary one.”
He concludes by saying that these symbols, so frequently met with, and
so clearly designed to indicate the presence of the Deity, “are, in
their origin, drawings of the solar Corona, as seen at the Sun-spot
minimum, and as such are the earliest eclipse representations which have
been preserved to us.”

I give these ideas for what they are worth; they are very ingeniously
worked out, and though the argument is not conclusive, yet I do think
that there is enough in it to be worth attention.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 23: Less certain is the allusion in Amos v. 8:—“Seek him
    that ... maketh the day dark with night.”]

    [Footnote 24: _Annales_, A.M., 3213, p. 45. Folio Ed.]

    [Footnote 25: _Minor Prophets_, p. 217.]

    [Footnote 26: _Athenæum_, May 18, 1867.]

    [Footnote 27: After all, do the circumstances necessarily presuppose
    a “miracle”? Hezekiah had only asked for a “sign.” In 2 Chron.
    xxxii. 31 the word “wonder” is applied to the event.]

    [Footnote 28: Hence the word “Tropic,” from τρέπω (I turn).]

    [Footnote 29: Homer, _Odyssey_, vol. ii. p. 255. Clarendon Press
    Series.]

    [Footnote 30: _Life of Pherecydes_, sec. 6.]

    [Footnote 31: _Life of Anaximander_, sec. 3.]

    [Footnote 32: Du Halde’s “_China_,” 3rd edition, 1741, vol. iii.
    p. 86.]

    [Footnote 33: Paper by W. Hunter in _Asiatic Researches_, vol. v.,
    p. 190. The Benares Observatory is described by Sir R. Barker in
    _Phil. Trans._, vol. lxvii., p. 598. 1777.]

    [Footnote 34: See p. 70 (_ante_).]

    [Footnote 35: _Knowledge_, vol. xx., p. 9, January 1897.]




                              CHAPTER X.

          ECLIPSES OF THE SUN MENTIONED IN HISTORY—CLASSICAL.


In this chapter we shall, for the most part, be on firmer ground than
hitherto, because several of the most eminent Greek and Latin historians
have left on record full and circumstantial accounts of eclipses which
have come under their notice, and which have been more or less
completely verified by the computations and researches of astronomers in
modern times. But these remarks do not, however, quite apply to the
first eclipse which will be mentioned.

Plutarch, in his _Life of Romulus_, refers to some remarkable incident
connected, in point of time at any rate, with his death:—“The air on
that occasion was suddenly convulsed and altered in a wonderful manner,
for the light of the Sun failed, and they were involved in an
astonishing darkness, attended on every side with dreadful thunderings
and tempestuous winds.” This so-called darkness is considered to have
been the same as that mentioned by Cicero.[36] There is so much myth
about Romulus that it is not safe to write in confident language.
Nevertheless it is a fact, according to Johnson, that there was a very
large eclipse of the Sun visible at Rome in the afternoon of May 26, 715
B.C., and 715 B.C. is supposed to have been the year, or about the year,
of the death of Romulus. Plutarch is also responsible for the statement
that a great eclipse of the Sun took place sometime before the birth of
Romulus; and if there is anything in this statement Johnson thinks that
the annular eclipse of November 28, 771 B.C., might meet the
circumstances of the case, but too much romance attaches to the history
of Romulus for anyone to write with assurance respecting the
circumstances of his career. Much of it is generally considered to be
fabulous.

In one of the extant fragments of the Greek poet Archilochus (said to be
the first who introduced iambics into his verses), the following
sentence occurs:—“Zeus the father of the Olympic Gods turned mid-day
into night hiding the light of the dazzling sun; an overwhelming dread
fell upon men.” The poet’s language may evidently apply to a total
eclipse of the Sun; and investigations by Oppolzer and Millosevich make
it probable that the reference is to the total eclipse of the Sun which
happened on April 6, 648 B.C. This was total at about 10 a.m. at Thasos
and in the northern part of the Ægean Sea. The acceptance of this date
displaces by about half a century the date commonly assigned for the
poet’s career, but this is not thought to be of much account having
regard to the hazy character of Grecian chronology before the Persian
wars.[37]

On May 28, 585 B.C. there occurred an eclipse the surrounding
circumstances of which present several features of particular interest.
One of the most celebrated of the astronomers of antiquity was Thales of
Miletus, and his astronomical labours were said to have included a
prediction of this eclipse, which moreover has the further interest to
us that it has assisted chronologists and historians in fixing the
precise date of an important event in ancient history. Herodotus[38]
describing a war which had been going on for some years between the
Lydians and the Medes gives the following account of the circumstances
which led to its premature termination:—“As the balance had not inclined
in favour of either nation, another engagement took place in the sixth
year of the war, in the course of which, just as the battle was growing
warm, day was suddenly turned into night. This event had been foretold
to the Ionians by Thales of Miletus, who predicted for it the very year
in which it actually took place. When the Lydians and Medes observed the
change they ceased fighting, and were alike anxious to conclude peace.”
Peace was accordingly agreed upon and cemented by a twofold marriage.
“For (says the historian) without some strong bond, there is little
security to be found in men’s covenants.” The exact date of this eclipse
was long a matter of discussion, and eclipses which occurred in 610 B.C.
and 593 B.C. were each thought at one time or another to have been the
one referred to. The question was finally settled by the late Sir G. B.
Airy, after an exhaustive inquiry, in favour of the eclipse of 585 B.C.
This date has the further advantage of harmonising certain statements
made by Cicero and Pliny as to its having happened in the 4th year of
the 48th Olympiad.

Another word or two may be interesting as regards the share which Thales
is supposed to have had in predicting this eclipse, the more so, that
very high authorities in the domains of astronomy, and chronology, and
antiquities take opposite sides in the matter. Sir G. C. Lewis, Bart.,
M.P., may be cited first as one of the unbelievers. He says[39] that
Thales is “reported to have predicted it to the _Ionians_. If he had
predicted it to the Lydians, in whose country the eclipse was to be
total, his conduct would be intelligible, but it seems strange that he
should have predicted it to the Ionians who had no direct interest in
the event.” Bosanquet replies to this by pointing out that Miletus, in
_Ionia_, was the birthplace of Thales, and also that a shadow, covering
two degrees of latitude, passing through Ionia, would also necessarily
cover Lydia.

Another dissentient is Sir H. C. Rawlinson,[40] who, remembering that
Thales is said to have predicted a good olive crop, and Anaxagoras the
fall of an aërolite, says:—“The prediction of this eclipse by Thales may
fairly be classed with the prediction of a good olive crop, or the fall
of an aërolite. Thales, indeed, could only have obtained the requisite
knowledge for predicting eclipses from the Chaldeans; and that the
science of these astronomers, although sufficient for the investigation
of lunar eclipses, did not enable them to calculate solar
eclipses—dependent as such a calculation is, not only on the
determination of the period of recurrence, but on the true projection
also of the track of the Sun’s shadow along a particular line over the
surface of the earth—may be inferred from our finding that in the
astronomical canon of Ptolemy, which was compiled from the Chaldean
registers, the observations of the Moon’s eclipse are alone entered.”

Airy[41] replied to these observations as follows:—“I think it not at
all improbable that the eclipse was so predicted, and there is one easy
way, and only one of predicting it—namely, by the _Saros_, or period of
18 years, 10 days, 8 hours nearly. By use of this period an evening
eclipse may be predicted from a morning eclipse but a morning eclipse
can rarely be predicted from an evening eclipse (as the interval of
eight hours after an evening eclipse will generally throw the eclipse at
the end of the _Saros_ into the hours of night). The evening eclipse,
therefore, of B.C. 585, May 28, which I adopt as being most certainly
the eclipse of Thales, might be predicted from the morning eclipse of
B.C. 603, May 17.... No other of the eclipses discussed by Baily and
Oltmanns present the same facility for prediction.”

Xenophon[42] mentions an eclipse as having led to the capture by the
Persians of the Median city Larissa. In the retreat of the Greeks on the
eastern side of the Tigris, they crossed the river Zapetes and also a
ravine, and then reached the Tigris. According to Xenophon, they found
at this place a large deserted city formerly inhabited by the Medes. Its
wall was 25 feet thick and 100 feet high; its circumference 2 parasangs
[= 7½ miles]. It was built of burnt brick on an under structure of
stone 20 feet in height. Xenophon then proceeds to say that “when the
Persians obtained the Empire from the Medes, the King of the Persians
besieged the city but was unable by any means to take it till a cloud
having covered the Sun and caused it to disappear completely, the
inhabitants withdrew in alarm, and thus the city was captured. Close to
this city was a pyramid of stone, one plethrum in breadth, two plethra
in height.... Thence the Greeks proceeded six parasangs to a great
deserted castle by a city called Mespila formerly inhabited by the
Medes; the substructure of its wall was of squared stone abounding in
shells ... the King of the Persians besieged it but could not take it;
Zeus terrified the inhabitants with thunderbolts, and so the city was
taken.”

The minute description here given by Xenophon enabled Sir A. H. Layard,
Captain Felix Jones, and others, to identify Larissa with the modern
Nimrud and Mespila with Mosul. A suspicion is thrown out in some
editions of the _Anabasis_ that the language cited might refer to an
eclipse of the Sun. It is to be noted, however, that it is not included
by Ricciolus in the list of eclipses mentioned in ancient writers which
he gives in his _Almagestum Novum_. Sir G. B. Airy, having had his
attention called to the matter, examined roughly all the eclipses which
occurred during a period of 40 years, covering the supposed date implied
by Xenophon. Having selected two, he computed them accurately but found
them inapplicable. He then tried another (May 19, 557 B.C.) which he had
previously passed over because he doubted its totality, and he had the
great satisfaction of finding that the eclipse, though giving a small
shadow, had been total, and that it had passed so near to Nimrud that
there could be no doubt of its being the eclipse sought.

Sir G. B. Airy was such a very careful worker and investigator of
eclipses that his conclusions in this matter have met with general
acceptance. It must, however, in fairness be stated that a very
competent American astronomer, Professor Newcomb, has expressed doubts
as to whether after all Xenophon’s allusion is to an eclipse, but,
judging by his closing words, the learned American does not seem quite
satisfied with his own scepticism, for he says—“Notwithstanding my want
of confidence, I conceive the possibility of a real eclipse to be
greater than in the eclipse of Thales, while we have the great
advantages that the point of occurrence is well defined, the shadow
narrow, and, if it was an eclipse at all, the circumstance of totality
placed beyond serious doubt.”[43]

In the same year as that in which, according to the common account, the
battle of Salamis was fought (480 B.C.), there occurred a phenomenon
which is thus adverted to by Herodotus[44]—“At the first approach of
Spring the army quitted Sardis and marched towards Abydos; at the moment
of its departure the Sun suddenly quitted its place in the heavens and
disappeared though there were no clouds in sight and the day was quite
clear; day was thus turned into night.” We are told[45] that “As the
king was going against Greece, and had come into the region of the
Hellespont, there happened an eclipse of the Sun in the East; this sign
portended to him his defeat, for the Sun was eclipsed in the region of
its rising, and Xerxes was also marching from that quarter.” So far as
words go these accounts admirably befit a total eclipse of the Sun, but
regarded as such it has given great trouble to chronologers, and the
identification of the eclipse is still uncertain. Hind’s theory is that
the allusion is to an eclipse and in particular to the eclipse of
February 17, 478 B.C. Though not total at Sardis yet the eclipse was
very large, 94/100ths of the Sun being covered. If we accept this, it
follows that the usually recognised date for the battle of Salamis must
be altered by two years. Airy thought it “extremely probable” that the
narrative related to the total eclipse of the _Moon_, which happened on
March 13, 479 B.C., but this is difficult to accept, especially as
Plutarch, in his _Life of Pelopidas_, says—“An army was soon got ready,
but as the general was on the point of marching, the Sun began to be
eclipsed, and the city was covered with darkness in the daytime.” This
seems explicit enough, assuming the record to be true and that the same
incident is referred to by Plutarch as by Herodotus and Aristides.

Since the time when Airy and Hind examined this question, all the known
facts have been again reviewed by Mr. W. T. Lynn, who pronounces, but
with some hesitation, in favour of the eclipse of October 2, 480 B.C.,
as the one associated with the battle of Salamis. He does this by
refusing to see in the above quotations from Herodotus any allusion to a
solar eclipse at all, but invites us to consider a later statement in
Herodotus[46] as relating to an eclipse though the historian only calls
it a prodigy.

After the battle of Thermopylæ the Peloponnesian Greeks commenced to
fortify the isthmus of Corinth with the view of defending it with their
small army against the invading host of Xerxes. The Spartan troops were
under the command of Cleombrotus, the brother of Leonidas, the hero of
Thermopylæ. He had been consulting the oracles at Sparta, and Herodotus
states that “while he was offering sacrifice to know if he should march
out against the Persian, the Sun was suddenly darkened in mid-sky.” This
occurrence so frightened Cleombrotus that he drew off his forces and
returned home. It is uncertain from the narrative of Herodotus whether
Cleombrotus returned to Sparta in the autumn of the year of the battle
of Salamis, or in the spring of the next following year which was that
in which the battle of Platæa was fought. Bishop Thirlwall[47] thinks
that it was the latter, but Lynn pronounces for the former, adding that
the date may well have been in October, and the solar eclipse of October
2, 480 B.C. may have been the phenomenon which attracted notice,
particularly as the Sun would have been high in the heavens, the
greatest phase (6/10ths) occurring, according to Hind, at 50 minutes
past noon. Here I must leave the matter, merely remarking that this
alternative explanation obviates the necessity for disturbing the
commonly received date of the battle of Salamis.

Thucydides states that during the Peloponnesian war “things formerly
repeated on hearsay, but very rarely confirmed by facts, became not
incredible, both about earthquakes and eclipses of the Sun which came to
pass more frequently than had been remembered in former times.” One such
eclipse he assigns to the first year of the war and says[48] that “in
the same summer, at the beginning of a new lunar month (at which time
alone the phenomenon seems possible) the Sun was eclipsed after mid-day,
and became full again after it had assumed a crescent form and after
some of the stars had shone out.” Aug. 3, 431 B.C. is generally
recognised as the date of this event. The eclipse was not total only
three-fourths of the Sun’s disc being obscured. Venus was 20° and
Jupiter 43° distant from the Sun, so probably these were the “stars”
that were seen. This eclipse nearly prevented the Athenian expedition
against the Lacedæmonians. The sailors were frightened by it, but a
happy thought occurred to Pericles, the commander of the Athenian
forces. Plutarch, in his _Life of Pericles_, says:—“The whole fleet was
in readiness, and Pericles on board his own galley, when there happened
an eclipse of the Sun. The sudden darkness was looked upon as an
unfavourable omen, and threw the sailors into the greatest
consternation. Pericles observing that the pilot was much astonished and
perplexed, took his cloak, and having covered his eyes with it, asked
him if he found anything terrible in that, or considered it as a bad
presage? Upon his answering in the negative, he said, ‘Where is the
difference, then between this and the other, except that something
bigger than my cloak causes the eclipse?’”

Another eclipse is mentioned by Thucydides[49] in connection with an
expedition of the Athenians against Cythera. He says:—“At the very
commencement of the following summer there was an eclipse of the Sun at
the time of a new moon, and in the early part of the same month an
earthquake.” This has been identified with the annular eclipse of March
21, 424 B.C., the central line of which passed across Northern Europe.
It is not quite clear whether the historian wishes to insinuate that the
eclipse caused the earthquake or the earthquake the eclipse.

An eclipse known as that of Ennius is another of the eclipses antecedent
to the Christian Era which has been the subject of full modern
investigation, and the circumstances of which are such that, in the
language of Professor Hansen, “it may be reckoned as one of the most
certain and well-established eclipses of antiquity.” The record of it
has only been brought to light in modern times by the discovery of
Cicero’s Treatise, _De Republicâ_. According to Cicero,[50] Ennius the
great Roman poet, who lived in the second century B.C., and who died of
gout contracted, it is said, by frequent intoxication, recorded an
interesting event in the following words:—_Nonis Junii soli luna
obstetit et nox_, “On the Nones of June the Moon was in opposition to
the Sun and night.” This singular phrase has long been assumed to allude
to an eclipse of the Sun, but the precise interpretation of the words
was not for a long time realised. In Cicero’s time the Nones of June
fell on the 5th, but in the time of Ennius, who lived a century and a
half before Cicero, the Nones of June fell between June 5 and July 4 on
account of the lunar years and the intercalary month of the Roman
Calendar. The date of this eclipse is distinctly known to be June 21,
400 B.C., but the hour was long in dispute. Professor Zech found that
the Sun set at Rome eclipsed, and that the maximum phase took place
after sun-set. Hansen, however, with his better Tables, found that the
eclipse was total at Rome, and that the totality ended at 7.33 p.m., the
Sun setting almost immediately afterwards at 7.36. This fact, Hansen
considers, explains the otherwise unintelligible passage of Ennius
quoted above: instead of saying _et nox_, he should have said _et simul
nox_, “and immediately it was night.” Newcomb questions the totality of
this eclipse, but assigns no clear reasons for his doubts.[51]

On August 14, 394 B.C., there was a large eclipse of the Sun visible in
the Mediterranean. It occurred in the forenoon, and is mentioned by
Xenophon[52] in connection with a naval engagement in which the Persians
were defeated by Conon.

Plutarch, in his _Life of Pelopidas_, relates how one, Alexander of
Pheræ, had devastated several cities of Thessaly, and that as soon as
the oppressed inhabitants had learned that Pelopidas had come back from
an embassy on which he had been to the King of Persia, they sent
deputies to him to Thebes to beg the favour of armed assistance, with
Pelopidas as general. “The Thebans willingly granted their request, and
an army was soon got ready, but as the general was on the point of
marching, the Sun began to be eclipsed, and the city was covered with
darkness in the day-time.” This eclipse is generally identified with
that of July 13, 364 B.C. If this is correct, Plutarch’s language must
be incorrect, or at least greatly exaggerated, for no more than about
three-fourths of the Sun was obscured.

On February 29, 357 B.C., there happened an eclipse, also visible in or
near the Mediterranean. This is supposed to have been the eclipse for
the prediction of which Helicon, a friend of Plato, received from
Dionysius, King of Syracuse, payment in the shape of a talent.

We have now to consider another ancient eclipse which has a history of
peculiar interest as regards the investigations to which it has been
subjected. It is commonly known as the “Eclipse of Agathocles,” and is
recorded by two historians of antiquity in the words following. Diodorus
Siculus[53] says:—

“Agathocles also, though closely pursued by the enemy, by the advantage
of the night coming on (beyond all hope), got safe off from them. The
next day there was such an eclipse of the Sun, that the stars appeared
everywhere in the firmament, and the day was turned into night, upon
which Agathocles’s soldiers (conceiving that God thereby did foretell
their destruction) fell into great perplexities and discontents
concerning what was like to befall them.”

Justin says[54]:—

“By the harangue the hearts of the soldiers were somewhat elevated, but
an eclipse of the Sun that had happened during their voyage still
possessed them with superstitious fears of a bad omen. The king was at
no less pain to satisfy them about this affair than about the war, and
therefore he told them that he should have thought this sign an ill
presage for them, if it had happened before they set out, but having
happened afterwards he could not but think it presaged ill to those
against whom they marched. Besides, eclipses of the luminaries always
signify a change of affairs, and therefore some change was certainly
signified, either to Carthage, which was in such a flourishing
condition, or to them whose affairs were in a very ruinous state.”

The substance of these statements is that in the year 310 B.C.
Agathocles, Tyrant of Syracuse, while conducting his fleet from Syracuse
to the Coast of Africa, found himself enveloped in the shadow of an
eclipse, which evidently, from the accounts, was total. His fleet had
been chased by the Carthaginians on leaving Syracuse the preceding day,
but got away under the cover of night. On the following morning about 8
or 9 a.m. a sudden darkness came on which greatly alarmed the sailors.
So considerable was the darkness, that numerous stars appeared. It is
not at the first easy to localise the position of the fleet, except that
we may infer that it could hardly have got more than 80 or at the most
100 miles away from the harbour of Syracuse where it had been closely
blockaded by a Carthaginian fleet. Agathocles would not have got away at
all but for the fact that a relieving fleet was expected, and the
Carthaginians were obliged to relax their blockade in order to go in
search of the relieving fleet. Thus it came about not only that
Agathocles set himself free, but was able to retaliate on his enemies by
landing on the coast of Africa at a point near the modern Cape Bon, and
devastating the Carthaginian territories. The voyage thither occupied
six days, and the eclipse occurred on the second day. Though we are not
informed of the route followed by Agathocles, that is to say whether he
passed round the North or the South side of the island of Sicily, yet it
has been made clear by astronomers that the southern side was that
taken.

Baily, who was the first modern astronomer to investigate the
circumstances of this eclipse, found that there was an irreconcilable
difference between the path of the shadow found by himself and the
historical statement, a gap of about 180 geographical miles seeming to
intervene between the most southerly position which could be assigned to
the fleet of Agathocles, and the most northerly possible limit of the
path of the eclipse shadow. This was the condition of the problem when
Sir G. B. Airy took it up in 1853.[55] He, however, was able to throw an
entirely new light upon the matter. The tables used by Baily were
distinctly inferior to those now in use, and Sir G. B. Airy thought
himself justified in saying that to obviate the discordance of 180 miles
just referred to “it is only necessary to suppose an error of 3′ in the
computed distances of the Sun and Moon at conjunction, a very
inconsiderable correction for a date anterior to the epoch of the tables
by more than twenty-one centuries.”

It deserves to be mentioned, though the point cannot here be dwelt upon
at much length, that these ancient eclipses all hang together in such a
way that it is not sufficient for the man of Astronomy and the man of
Chronology to agree on one eclipse, unless they can harmonise the facts
of several.

For instance, the eclipse of Thales, the date of which was long and much
disputed, has a material bearing on the eclipse of Agathocles, the date
of which admits of no dispute; and one of the problems which had to be
solved half a century ago was how best to use the eclipse of Agathocles
to determine the date of that of Thales. If 610 B.C. were accepted for
the Thales eclipse, so as to throw the zone of total darkness anywhere
over Asia Minor (where for the sake of history it was essential to put
it) the consequence would be that the shadow of the eclipse of 310 B.C.
would have been thrown so far on to land, in Africa, as to make it out
of the question for Agathocles and his fleet to have been in it, yet we
know for a certainty that he was in it in that year, and no other year.
Conversely, if 603 B.C. were accepted for the Thales eclipse, then to
raise northwards the position of the shadow in that year from the line
of the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf, that it might pass through Asia
Minor, would so raise the position of the shadow in 310 B.C. as to throw
it far too much to the N. of Sicily for Agathocles, who we know must
have gone southwards to Africa, to have entered it. But if we assume 585
B.C. as the date of the eclipse of Thales, we obtain a perfect
reconciliation of everything that needs to be reconciled; the shadow of
the eclipse of 585 B.C. will be found to have passed where ancient
history tells us it did pass—namely, through Ionia, and therefore
through the centre of Asia Minor, and on the direct route from Lydia to
Media; whilst we also find that the shadow of the 310 B.C. eclipse, that
is the one in the time of Agathocles, passed within 100 miles of
Syracuse, a fact which is stated almost in those very words by the two
historians who have recorded the doings of Agathocles and his fleet in
those years.

This is where the matter was left by Airy in 1853. Four years later the
new solar and lunar tables of the German astronomer Hansen were
published, and having been applied to the eclipse of 585 B.C., the
conclusions just stated were amply confirmed. As if to make assurance
doubly sure, Airy went over his ground again, testing his former
conclusions with regard to the eclipse of Thales by the eclipse of
Larissa, in 557 B.C. already referred to, and bringing in the eclipse
of Stiklastad in 1030 A.D., to be referred to presently. And as the
final result, it may be stated that all the foregoing dates are now
known to an absolute certainty, especially confirmed as they were in all
essential points by a computer of the eminence of the late Mr. J. R.
Hind.

On a date which corresponds to February 11, 218 or 217 B.C., an eclipse
of the Sun, which was partial in Italy, is mentioned by Livy.[56]
Newcomb found that the central line passed a long way from Italy, to
wit, “far down in Africa.”

An eclipse of the Sun is mentioned by Dion Cassius[57] as having
happened when Cæsar crossed the Rubicon, a celebrated event made use of
by speakers, political and otherwise, on endless occasions in modern
history. There seems no doubt that the passage of the Rubicon took place
in 51 B.C., and that the eclipse must have been that of March 7, 51 B.C.
The circumstances of this eclipse have been investigated by Hind, who
found that the eclipse was an annular one, the annular phase lasting 6½
minutes in Northern Italy.

Arago associates the death of Julius Cæsar in 44 B.C. with an annular
eclipse of the Sun, but seemingly without sufficient warrant. The actual
record is to the effect that about the time of the great warrior’s death
there was an extraordinary dimness of the Sun. Whatever it was that was
noticed, clearly it could not have been an annular eclipse, because no
such eclipse then happened. Johnson suggests that Arago confused the
record of some meteorological interference with the Sun’s light with the
annular eclipse that happened seven years previously when Cæsar passed
the Rubicon, to which eclipse allusion has already been made. That there
was for a long while a great deficiency of sunshine in Italy about the
time of Cæsar’s death seems clear from remarks made by Pliny, Plutarch,
and Tibullus, and the words of Suetonius seem to imply something of a
meteorological character. I should not have mentioned this matter at
all, but for Arago’s high repute as an astronomer. According to
Seneca[58] during an eclipse a comet was also seen.

It is an interesting question to inquire whether any allusions to
eclipses are to be found in Homer, and no very certain answer can be
given. In the _Iliad_ (book xvii., lines 366-8) the following passage
will be found:—“Nor would you say that the Sun was safe, or the Moon,
for they were wrapt in dark haze in the course of the combat.”

In the _Odyssey_ (book xx., lines 356-7) we find:—“And the Sun has
utterly perished from heaven and an evil gloom is overspread.” This was
considered by old commentators to be an allusion to an eclipse, and in
the opinion of W. W. Merry[59] “this is not impossible, as they were
celebrating the Festival of the New Moon.”

Certainly this language has somewhat the savour of a total eclipse of
the Sun, but it is difficult to say whether the allusion is historic,
as of a fact that had happened, or only a vague generality. Perhaps the
latter is the most justifiable surmise.

I have in the many preceding pages been citing ancient eclipses, for the
reason, more or less plainly expressed, that they are of value to
astronomers as assisting to define the theory of the Moon’s motions in
its orbit, and this they should do; but it is not unreasonable to bring
this chapter to a close by giving the views of an eminent American
astronomer as to the objections to placing too much reliance on ancient
accounts of eclipses. Says Prof. S. Newcomb[60]:—“The first difficulty
is to be reasonably sure that a total eclipse was really the phenomenon
observed. Many of the statements supposed to refer to total eclipses are
so vague that they may be referred to other less rare phenomena. It must
never be forgotten that we are dealing with an age when accurate
observations and descriptions of natural phenomena were unknown, and
when mankind was subject to be imposed upon by imaginary wonders and
prodigies. The circumstance which we should regard as most unequivocally
marking a total eclipse is the visibility of the stars during the
darkness. But even this can scarcely be regarded as conclusive, because
Venus may be seen when there is no eclipse, and may be quite conspicuous
in an annular or a considerable partial eclipse. The exaggeration of a
single object into a plural is in general very easy. Another difficulty
is to be sure of the locality where the eclipse was total. It is
commonly assumed that the description necessarily refers to something
seen where the writer flourished, or where he locates his story. It
seems to me that this cannot be safely done unless the statement is made
in connection with some battle or military movement, in which case we
may presume the phenomena to have been seen by the army.”

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 36: _De Republicâ_, Lib. vi., cap. 22.]

    [Footnote 37: E. Millosevich, _Memorie della Societa Spettroscopisti
    Italiani_, vol. xxii. p. 70. 1893.]

    [Footnote 38: _Herodotus_, Book i., chap. 74. This eclipse is also
    mentioned by Pliny (_Nat. Hist._, Book ii., chap. 9) and by Cicero
    (_De Divinatione_, cap. 49).]

    [Footnote 39: _Astronomy of the Ancients_, p. 88.]

    [Footnote 40: _Herodotus_, edited by Rev. G. Rawlinson, vol. i. p.
    212.]

    [Footnote 41: _Month. Not._, R.A.S., vol. xviii. p. 148; March
    1858.]

    [Footnote 42: _Anabasis_, Lib. iii., cap. 4, sec. 7.]

    [Footnote 43: _Washington Observations_, 1875, Appendix II., p. 31.]

    [Footnote 44: Book vii., chap. 37. See Rawlinson’s _Herodotus_, vol.
    iv. p. 39.]

    [Footnote 45: _Scholia, in Aristidis Orationes_, Ed. Frommel, p.
    222.]

    [Footnote 46: Book ix., chap. 10. See Rawlinson’s _Herodotus_, 3rd
    ed. vol. iv. p. 379.]

    [Footnote 47: _History of Greece_, vol. ii. p. 330.]

    [Footnote 48: Book ii., chap. 28.]

    [Footnote 49: Book iv., chap. 52.]

    [Footnote 50: _De Republicâ_, Lib. i. c. 16.]

    [Footnote 51: _Washington Observations_, 1875, Appendix II., p. 33.]

    [Footnote 52: _Hellenics_, Book iv., chap. 3, sec. 10.]

    [Footnote 53: _Bibliothecæ Historicæ_, Lib. xx., cap. 1, sec. 5.]

    [Footnote 54: _Historia_, Lib. xxii., cap. 6.]

    [Footnote 55: _Phil. Trans._, vol. cxliii. pp. 187-91, 1853.]

    [Footnote 56: _Hist. Rom._, Lib. xxii., cap. 1.]

    [Footnote 57: _Hist. Rome_, Book xli., chap. 14.]

    [Footnote 58: _Naturalium Questionum_, Lib. vii.]

    [Footnote 59: Homer, _Odyssey_, vol. ii. p. 328. Clarendon Press
    Series.]

    [Footnote 60: _Washington Observations_, 1875, Appendix II., p. 18.]




                              CHAPTER XI.

              ECLIPSES OF THE SUN MENTIONED IN HISTORY.—
               THE CHRISTIAN ERA TO THE NORMAN CONQUEST.


The Christian Era is, for several reasons, a suitable point of time from
which to take a new departure in speaking of historical eclipses,
although the First Century, at least, might obviously be regarded as
belonging to classical history—but let that pass.

Dion Cassius[61] relates that on a date corresponding to March 28, A.D.
5, the Sun was partly eclipsed. Johnston says that the central line
passed over Norway and Sweden. It seems, perhaps, a little strange that
a writer who lived in Bithynia in the 3rd Century of the Christian Era
should have picked up any information about something that happened in
the extreme North of Europe two centuries previously. But probably the
eclipse must have been seen in Italy.

On November 24, A.D. 29, there happened an eclipse of the Sun which is
sometimes spoken of as the “eclipse of Phlegon.” Eusebius, the
ecclesiastical historian, records Phlegon’s testimony. Phlegon was a
native of Tralles in Lydia, and one of the Emperor Adrian’s freedmen.
The eclipse in question happened at noon, and the stars were seen. It
was total, and the line of totality, according to Hind,[62] passed
across the Black Sea from near Odessa to Sinope, thence near the site of
Nineveh to the Persian Gulf. A partial eclipse with four-fifths of the
Sun’s diameter covered was visible at Jerusalem. This is the only solar
eclipse which was visible at Jerusalem during the period usually fixed
for Christ’s public ministry. This eclipse was for a long time, and by
various writers, associated with the darkness which prevailed at
Jerusalem on the day of our Lord’s Crucifixion, but there seems no
warrant whatever for associating the two events. The Crucifixion
darkness was assuredly a supernatural phenomenon, and there is nothing
supernatural in a total eclipse of the Sun. To this it may be added that
both Tertullian at the beginning of the 3rd century and Lucian, the
martyr of Nicomedia, who died in 312, appealed to the testimony of
national archives then in existence, as witnessing to the fact that a
supernatural darkness had prevailed at the time of Christ’s death.
Moreover, the generally recorded date of the Crucifixion, namely, April
3, A.D. 33, would coincide with a full Moon. As it happened, that full
Moon suffered eclipse, but she emerged from the Earth’s shadow about a
quarter of an hour before she rose at Jerusalem (6 h. 36 m. p.m.): the
penumbra continued upon her disc for an hour afterwards.

Speaking of the Emperor Claudius, Dion Cassius[63] says:—“There was
going to be an eclipse on his birthday. Claudius feared some
disturbance, as there had been other prodigies, so he put forth a public
notice, not only that the obscuration would take place and about the
time and magnitude of it, but also about the causes which produce such
events.” This is an interesting statement, especially in view of what I
have said on a previous page about the indifference of the Romans to
Astronomy. It would, likewise, be interesting to know how Claudius
acquired his knowledge, and who coached him up in the matter. This
eclipse occurred on August 1, A.D. 45. Barely half the Sun’s diameter
was covered.

Philostratus[64] states that “about this time while he was pursuing his
studies in Greece such an omen was observable in the heavens. A crown
resembling Iris surrounded the disc of the Sun and darkened its rays.”
“About this time” is to be understood as referring to some date shortly
preceding the death of the Emperor Domitian which occurred on September
18, A.D. 96. This has usually been regarded as the earliest allusion to
what we now call the Sun’s “Corona”; or, as an alternative idea, that
the allusion is simply to an annular eclipse of the Sun. But both these
theories have been called in question; by Johnston because he cannot
find an eclipse which in his view of things will respond as regards date
to the statement of Philostratus, and by Lynn on the same ground and on
other grounds, _more suo_. The question of identification requires
looking into more fully. There was a total eclipse on May 21, A.D. 95,
but it was only visible as a partial eclipse in Western Asia and not
visible at all in Greece. This is given as the conclusion arrived at by
the German astronomer Ginzel. But it does not seem to me sufficient to
overthrow, without further investigation, the fairly plain language of
Philostratus, which is possibly confirmed by a passage in Plutarch[65]
in which he discusses certain eclipse phenomena in the light of a recent
eclipse. The date of Plutarch’s “recent” eclipse is somewhat uncertain,
but that fact does not necessarily militate against his testimony
respecting the Corona or what is regarded to have been such. The
statement of Philostratus, treated as a mention of a total solar
eclipse, is accepted as sufficiently conclusive by Sir W. Huggins and
the late Professor R. Grant. Johnston, to meet the supposed difficulty
of finding an eclipse to accord with the assertion of the historian,
suggests that “perhaps some peculiar solar halo or mock Sun, or other
meteorological formation” is referred to. But Stockwell has advanced
very good reasons for the opinion that the eclipse of Sept. 3, A.D. 118,
fully meets the circumstances of the case. Grant’s opinion is given in
these emphatic words:—“It appears to me that the words here quoted
[from Apollonius] refer beyond all doubt to a total eclipse of the Sun,
and thus the phenomenon seen encompassing the Sun’s disc was, really as
well as verbally, identical with the modern Corona.”[66]

With the end of the first century of the Christian Era we may be said to
quit the realms of classical history and to pass on to eclipse records
of a different character, and, so far as regards European observations,
of comparatively small scientific value or usefulness. Our information
is largely derived from ecclesiastical historians and, later on, from
monkish chronicles, which as a rule are meagre in a surprising degree.
Perhaps I ought not to say “surprising,” because after the times of the
Greek astronomers (who in their way may almost be regarded as
professionals), and after the epoch of the famous Ptolemy, Astronomy
well-nigh ceased to exist for many centuries in Europe, until, say, the
15th century, barring the labours of the Arabians and their kinsmen the
Moors in Spain in the 9th and following centuries.

In examining therefore the records of eclipses which have been handed
down to us from A.D. 100 forwards through more than 1000 years, I shall
not offer my readers a long dry statement of eclipse dates, but only
pick out here and there such particular eclipses as seem to present
details of interest for some or other reason.

On April 12, 237 A.D., there was, according to Julius Capitolinus, an
eclipse of the Sun, so great “that people thought it was night, and
nothing could be done without lights.” Ricciolus remarked that this
eclipse happened about the time of the Sixth Persecution of the
Christians, and when the younger Gordian was proclaimed Emperor, after
his father had declined the proffered dignity, being 80 years of age.
The line of totality crossed Italy about 5 p.m. in the afternoon, to the
N. of Rome, and embraced Bologna.

Calvisius records, on the authority of Cedrenus, an eclipse of the Sun
on August 6, 324 A.D., which was sufficiently great for the stars to be
seen at mid-day. The eclipse was associated with an earthquake, which
shattered thirteen cities in Campania. Johnston remarks that no more
than three-fourths of the Sun’s disc would have been covered, as seen in
Campania, but that elsewhere in Italy, at about 3 p.m., the eclipse was
much larger, and perhaps one or two of the planets might have been
visible.

On July 17, 334 A.D., there was an eclipse, which seems to have been
total in Sicily, if we may judge from the description given by Julius
Firmicus.[67]

Ammianus Marcellinus[68] describes an eclipse, to which the date of
August 28, 360 A.D., has been assigned. Humboldt, quoting this
historian, says that the description is quite that of a solar eclipse,
but its stated long duration (daybreak to noon), and the word _caligo_
(fog or mist) are awkward factors. Moreover, the historian associates it
with events which happened in the eastern provinces of the Roman
Empire; but Johnston seems in effect to challenge Marcellinus’s
statement when he says, “It is true that there was an annular eclipse of
the Sun in the early morning on the above date, but it could only be
seen in countries E. of the Persian Gulf.”

About the time that Alaric, King of the Visigoths appeared before Rome,
there was a gloom so great that the stars appeared in the daytime. This
narrative is considered to apply to an eclipse of the Sun, which
occurred on June 18, 410 A.D. The eclipse was an annular one, but as the
central line must have crossed far S. of Rome, the stars must have been
seen not at Rome but somewhere else.

An eclipse occurred on July 19, 418 A.D., which is remarkable for a
twofold reason. People had an opportunity not only of seeing an eclipse,
but also a comet. We owe the account of the circumstances to
Philostorgius,[69] who tells us that—“On July 19, towards the 8th hour
of the day, the Sun was so eclipsed, that even the stars were visible.
But at the same time that the Sun was thus hid, a light, in the form of
a cone was seen in the sky; some ignorant people called it a comet, but
in this light we saw nothing that announced a comet, for it was not
terminated by a tail; it resembled the flame of a torch, subsisting by
itself, without any star for its base. Its movement too was very
different from that of a comet. It was first seen to the E. of the
equinoxes; after that, having passed through the last star in the Bear’s
tail, it continued slowly its journey towards the W. Having thus
traversed the heavens, it at length disappeared, having lasted more than
four months. It first appeared about the middle of the summer, and
remained visible until nearly the end of autumn.”

Boillot, a French writer, has suggested that this description is that of
the zodiacal light, but this seems out of the question in view of the
details given by the Chinese of a comet having been visible in the
autumn of this year for 11 weeks, and having passed through the square
of Ursa Major. Reverting to the eclipse—Johnston finds that the greatest
phase at Constantinople, which was probably the place of observation,
occurred at about half an hour after noon, when a thin crescent of light
might have been seen on the northern limb of the Sun. From this it would
appear that the central line of eclipse must have passed somewhat to the
south of Constantinople. To the same effect Hind, who found that
95/100ths of the Sun’s diameter was covered at Constantinople.

An eclipse of the Sun seems to be referred to by Gregorius Turonensis,
when he says[70] that:—“Then even the Sun appeared hideous, so that
scarcely a third part of it gave light, I believe on account of such
deeds of wickedness and shedding of innocent blood.” This would seem to
have been the eclipse which occurred on February 24, 453 A.D., when
Attila and the Huns were ravaging Italy, and to them it was doubtless
that the writer alluded. At Rome three-fourths of the Sun’s disc would
have been eclipsed at sunset, a finding which tallies fairly with the
statement of Gregorius.

It is not till far into the 6th century that we come upon a native
English record of an eclipse of the Sun as having been observed in
England. This deficiency in our national annals is thus judiciously
explained and commented on by our clever and talented American
authoress.[71] Speaking of the eclipse of February 15, 538 A.D., she
says:—“The accounts, however, are greatly confused and uncertain, as
would perhaps be natural fully 60 years before the advent of St.
Augustine, and when Britain was helplessly harassed with its continual
struggle in the fierce hands of West Saxons and East Saxons, of Picts
and conquering Angles. Men have little time to record celestial
happenings clearly, much less to indulge in scientific comment and
theorising upon natural phenomena, when the history of a nation sways to
and fro with the tide of battle, and what is gained to-day may be
fatally lost to-morrow. And so there is little said about this eclipse,
and that little is more vague and uncertain even than the monotonous
plaints of Gildas—the one writer whom Britain has left us, in his meagre
accounts of the conquest of Kent, and the forsaken walls and violated
shrines of this early epoch.”

The well-known _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_[72] is our authority for this
eclipse having been noted in England, but the record is bare
indeed:—“In this year the Sun was eclipsed 14 days before the Calends of
March from early morning till 9 a.m.” Tycho Brahe, borrowing from
Calvisius, who borrowed from somebody else, says that the eclipse
happened “in the 5th year of Henry, King of the West Saxons, at the 1st
hour of the day till nearly the 3rd, or immediately after sunrise.”
Johnson finds that at London nearly three-fourths of the Sun’s disc was
covered at 7.43 a.m.

The next eclipse recorded in the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ is somewhat
difficult to explain. It is said that in 540 A.D. “The Sun was eclipsed
on the 12th of the Calends of July [= June 20], and the stars appeared
full nigh half an hour after 9 a.m.” Johnson’s calculations make the
middle of the eclipse to have occurred at about 7.37 a.m. at London,
two-thirds of the Sun’s diameter being covered. He notes that the Moon’s
semi-diameter was nearly at its maximum whilst the Sun’s semi-diameter
was nearly at its minimum—a favourable combination for a long totality.
The visibility of the stars seems difficult to explain in connection
with this eclipse, and therefore he suggests that the annalist has made
a mistake of four years and meant to refer to the eclipse of September
1, 536 A.D., but this does not seem a satisfactory theory.

The year after Pope Martin held a Synod to condemn the Monothelite
heresy, an eclipse of the Sun took place. It is mentioned by Tycho Brahe
in his catalogue of eclipses as having been seen in England. Johnson
gives the date as February 6, 650 A.D., and finds that the Sun was
three-fourths obscured at London at 3.30 p.m.

The _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ tells us under the year A.D. 664 that, “In
this year the Sun was eclipsed on the 5th of the Nones of May; and
Earcenbryht, King of the Kentish people died and Ecgbryht his son
succeeded to the Kingdom.” Kepler thought this eclipse had been total in
England, and Johnson calculating for London found that on May 1, at 5
p.m., there would only have been a very thin crescent of the Sun left
uncovered on the southern limb, so that the line of totality would have
passed across the country some distance to the N. of London.

The eclipse of Dec. 7, A.D. 671, seems to be associated with a comic
tragedy. The Caliph Moawiyah had a fancy to remove Mahomet’s pulpit from
Medina to his own residence at Damascus. “He said that the walking-stick
and pulpit of the Apostle of God should not remain in the hands of the
murderers of Othman. Great search was made for the walking-stick, and at
last they found it. Then they went in obedience to his commands to
remove the pulpit, when immediately, to their great surprise and
astonishment, the Sun was eclipsed to that degree that the stars
appeared.”[73] Once again the question of visible stars is in some sense
a source of difficulty. Hind found that the eclipse was annular on the
central line. At Medina the greatest phase occurred at 10h. 43m. a.m.
when 85/100ths of the Sun’s diameter was obscured. Hind suggests that in
the clear skies of that part of the world such a degree of eclipse might
be sufficient to bring out the brighter planets or stars. At any rate no
larger eclipse visible at Medina occurred about this epoch. Prof. Ockley
seems to refer to this eclipse in making, on the authority of several
Arabian writers, the mention he does of an eclipse in the quotation just
given.

Perhaps this will be a convenient place to bring in some remarks on
certain Arabian observations of eclipses only made known to the
scientific world in modern times. That the Arabians were very capable
practical astronomers has long been recognised as a well-established
fact, and if it had not been for them there would have been a tremendous
blank in the history of astronomy during at least six centuries from
about the year A.D. 700 onwards. In the year 1804 there was published at
Paris a French translation of an Arabian manuscript preserved at the
University of Leyden of which little was known until near the end of the
last century. The manuscript was then sent to Paris on loan to the
French Government which caused a translation to be made by “Citizen”
Caussin, and this was published under the title of _Le Livre de la
grande Table Hakénate_.[74] Caussin was Professor of Arabic at the
College of France. Newcomb considers this to contain the earliest exact
astronomical observations of eclipses which have reached us. He remarks
that some of the data left us by Ptolemy, Theon, Albategnius and others
may be the results of actual observations, but in no case, so far as is
known, have the figures of the actual observations been handed down. For
example, we cannot regard “midnight” nor “the middle of an eclipse” as
moments capable of direct observation without instruments of precision;
but in the Arabian work under consideration we find definite statements
of the altitudes of the heavenly bodies at the moments of the beginning
and ending of eclipses—data not likely to be tampered with in order to
agree with the results of calculation. The eclipses recorded are 28 in
number and usually the beginning and end of them were observed. The
altitudes are given sometimes only in whole degrees, sometimes in coarse
fractions of a degree. The most serious source of error to be confronted
in turning these observations to account arises from the uncertainty as
to how long after the first contact the eclipse was perceived and the
altitude taken; and how long before the true end was the eclipse lost
sight of. Making the best use he could of the records available Newcomb
found that they could safely be employed in his investigations into the
theory of the Moon.

The observations were taken, some at Bagdad and the remainder at Cairo.
I do not propose to occupy space by transcribing the accounts in detail,
but one extract may be offered as a sample of the rest—“Eclipse of the
Sun observed at Bagdad, August 18, 928 A.D. The Sun rose about
one-fourth eclipsed. We looked at the Sun on a surface of water and saw
it distinctly. At the end when we found no part of the Sun was any
longer eclipsed, and that its disc appeared in the water as a complete
circle, its altitude was 12° in the E., less the one-third of a division
of the instrument, which itself was divided to thirds of a degree. One
must therefore reduce the stated altitude by one-ninth of a degree,
leaving, therefore, the true altitude as 11° 53′ 20″.” The skill and
care shown in this record shows that the Arab who observed this eclipse
nearly a thousand years ago must have been a man of a different type
from an ordinary resident at Bagdad in the year 1899. No description is
given of the instrument used, but presumably it was some kind of a
quadrant. It does not appear why some of the observations were made at
Bagdad and some at Cairo. The Bagdad observations commence with an
eclipse of the Sun on November 30, 829, and end with an eclipse of the
Moon on November 5, 933. The Cairo observations begin with an eclipse of
the Sun on December 12, 977, and end with an eclipse of the Sun on
January 24, 1004. These statements apply to the 25 observations which
Newcomb considered were trustworthy enough to be employed in his
researches, but he rejected three as imperfect.

I have broken away from the strict thread of chronological sequence in
order to keep together the notes respecting Arabian observations of
eclipses. Let us now revert to the European eclipses.

Under the date of A.D. 733, the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ tells us that,
“In this year Æthelbald captured Somerton; and the Sun was eclipsed, and
all the Sun’s disc was like a black shield; and Acca was driven from his
bishopric.” Johnston suggests that the reference is to an annular
eclipse which he finds occurred on August 14, at about 8¼ h. in the
morning. In Schnurrer’s _Chronik der Seuchen_ (pt. i., § 113, p. 164),
it is stated that, “One year after the Arabs had been driven back across
the Pyrenees after the battle of Tours, the Sun was so much darkened on
the 19th of August as to excite universal terror.” It may be that the
English eclipse is here referred to, and a date wrong by five days
assigned to it by Schnurrer. Humboldt (_Cosmos_, vol. iv. p. 384, Bohn’s
ed.) reports this eclipse in an enumeration he gives of instances of the
Sun having been darkened.

On May 5, A.D. 840, there happened an eclipse of the Sun which, amongst
other effects, is said to have so greatly frightened Louis Le Debonnaire
(Charlemagne’s son) that it contributed to his death. The Emperor was
taken ill at Worms, and having been removed to Ingelheim, an island in
the Rhine, near Mayence, died there on June 20. Hind[75] found that this
was a total eclipse, and that the northern limit of totality passed
about 100 miles south of Worms. The middle of the eclipse occurred at
1h. 15m. p.m. with the Sun at an altitude of 57°. The duration of the
eclipse was unusually long, namely about 5½ minutes. With the Sun so
high and the obscuration lasting so long, this eclipse must have been
an unusually imposing one, and well calculated to inspire special alarm.

On Oct. 29, 878, in the reign of King Alfred, there was a total eclipse
visible at London. The mention of it in the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ is
as follows:—“The Sun was eclipsed at 1 hour of the day.” No month is
given, and the year is said to have been 879, which is undoubtedly
wrong. Hind found that the central line of the eclipse passed about 20
miles N. of London, and that the totality lasted 1m. 51s. Tycho Brahe in
his _Historia Cœlestis_ quotes from the _Annales Fuldenses_ a statement
that the Sun was so much darkened after the 9th hour that the stars
appeared in the heavens.

Thorpe in his edition of the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ quotes from Mr.
Richard Price a note which assigns the date of March 14, 880, to this
eclipse, and cites in confirmation a passage from the _Chronicle of
Florence of Worcester_, anno 879. The 880 eclipse is mentioned by Asser
in his _De Vitâ et Rebus gestis Alfredi_ in the words following:—“In the
same year [879] an eclipse of the Sun took place between three o’clock
and the evening, but nearer three o’clock.” The confusion of dates is
remarkable.

In the _Chronicon Scotorum_, under the date of 885, we find:—“An eclipse
of the Sun; and stars were seen in the heavens.” The reference appears
to be to the total eclipse of June 16, A.D. 885. The totality lasted
more than four minutes, and as the stars are said to have been visible
in the North of Ireland, doubtless that part of Ireland came within the
eclipse limits.

On Dec. 22, 968, there was an eclipse of the Sun, which was almost total
at London at about 8h. 33m. a.m., or soon after sunrise. The central
line passed across the S.-W. of England, and thence through France to
the Mediterranean. One Leon, a deacon at Corfu, observed this eclipse,
and has left behind what probably is the first perfectly explicit
mention of the Corona.[76]

On Aug. 30, 1030, there happened an eclipse visible in Norway, which has
already been alluded to on a previous page under the name of the
“eclipse of Stiklastad.” This was one of those eclipses, the
circumstances of which were examined many years ago in detail by Sir
G. B. Airy,[77] because he thought that information of value might be
obtained therefrom with respect to the motions of the Moon. Its
availability for that purpose has, however, been seriously questioned by
Professor Newcomb. Stiklastad is a place where a battle was fought, at
which Olav, King of Norway, is said to have been killed. While the
battle was in progress the Sun was totally eclipsed, and a red light
appeared around it. This is regarded as an early record of the Corona,
though not the first.[78] Johnston found that the eclipse was nearly
total at about 2h. 21m. p.m.

In 1033 there happened on June 29 an eclipse of the Sun, which
evidently had many observers, because it is mentioned by many
contemporary writers. For instance, the French historian, Glaber,[79]
says that “on the 3rd of the Calends of July there was an eclipse from
the sixth to the eighth hour of the day exceedingly terrible. For the
Sun became of a sapphire colour; in its upper part having the likeness
of a fourth part of the Moon.” This sufficiently harmonises with
Johnston’s calculations that about four-fifths of the Sun on the lower
side was covered at 10h. 50m. in the morning.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 61: _Hist. Rome_, Book lv., chap. 22.]

    [Footnote 62: Letter in the _Times_, July 19, 1872.]

    [Footnote 63: _Hist. Rome_, Book lx., chap. 26.]

    [Footnote 64: _Life of Apollonius of Tyana_, Book viii., c. 23.]

    [Footnote 65: Plut. _Opera Mor. et Phil._, vol. xix. p. 682 Ed.
    Lipsiæ, 1778.]

    [Footnote 66: _Ast. Nach_, No. 1838, vol. lxxvii. p. 223: March 31,
    1871.]

    [Footnote 67: _Matheseos_, Lib. i., cap. 2, p. 5, Basileæ. 1533.]

    [Footnote 68: _Historiæ_, Lib. xx., cap. 3, sec. 1.]

    [Footnote 69: _Epitome Historiæ Ecclesiasticæ_, Lib. xii., cap. 8.]

    [Footnote 70: _Historia Francorum_, Lib. ii., cap. 3 (_ad fin._).]

    [Footnote 71: Mrs. D. P. Todd, _Total Eclipses of the Sun_, p. 101.]

    [Footnote 72: _The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_, vol. ii. p. 14. Ed. B.
    Thorpe, 1861.]

    [Footnote 73: Prof. S. Ockley, _History of the Saracens_, vol ii. p.
    110. Camb. 1757.]

    [Footnote 74: It should be stated that prior to the publication of
    the work in a book form the greater part of the eclipse observations
    had been published in the _Mémoires de l’Institut National des
    Sciences et Arts: Sciences Mathématiques et Physiques_, tome ii.]

    [Footnote 75: Letter in the _Times_, July 19, 1872.]

    [Footnote 76: J. F. J. Schmidt, _Ast. Nach._, vol. lxxvii. p. 127,
    Feb. 1, 1871.]

    [Footnote 77: _Memoirs_, R.A.S., vol. xxvi. p. 131, 1858.]

    [Footnote 78: J. L. E. Dreyer, _Nature_, vol. xvi. p. 549, Oct. 25,
    1877.]




                             CHAPTER XII.

              ECLIPSES OF THE SUN MENTIONED IN HISTORY.—
                         MEDIÆVAL AND MODERN.


One of the most celebrated eclipses of mediæval times was that of August
2, 1133, visible as a total eclipse in Scotland. It was considered a
presage of misfortune to Henry I. and was thus referred to by William of
Malmesbury[80]:—

“The elements manifested their sorrow at this great man’s last departure
from England. For the Sun on that day at the 6th hour shrouded his
glorious face, as the poets say, in hideous darkness agitating the
hearts of men by an eclipse; and on the 6th day of the week early in the
morning there was so great an earthquake that the ground appeared
absolutely to sink down; an horrid noise being first heard beneath the
surface.”

This eclipse is also alluded to in the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ though
the year is wrongly given as 1135 instead of 1133 as it certainly was.
The _Chronicle_ says:—“In this year King Henry went over sea at Lammas,
and the second day as he lay and slept on the ship the day darkened over
all lands; and the Sun became as it were a three-night-old Moon, and the
stars about it at mid-day. Men were greatly wonder-stricken and
affrighted, and said that a great thing should come hereafter. So it
did, for the same year the king died on the following day after St.
Andrew’s Mass day, Dec. 2, in Normandy.” The king did die in 1135, but
there was no eclipse of the August new Moon, and without doubt the
writer has muddled up the year of the eclipse and of the king’s
departure from England (to which he never returned) and the year of his
death. Calvisius states that this eclipse was observed in Flanders and
that the stars appeared.

Respecting the above-mentioned discrepancy Mrs. Todd aptly remarks:—“So
Henry must have died in 1133, which he _did not_; or else there must
have been an eclipse in 1135, which there _was not_. But this is not the
only labyrinth into which chronology and old eclipses, imagination, and
computation, lead the unwary searcher.” Professor Freeman’s explanation
fairly clears up the difficulty:—“The fact that he never came back to
England, together with the circumstances of his voyage, seems to have
made a deep impression on men’s minds. In popular belief the signs and
wonders which marked his last voyage were transferred to the Lammas-tide
before his death two years later.”[81] The central line of this eclipse
traversed Scotland from Ross to Forfar and the eclipse was of course
large in every part of the country. The totality lasted 4m. 20s. in
Forfarshire.

Hind has furnished some further information respecting this eclipse. It
appears that during the existence of the Kingdom of Jerusalem created by
the Crusaders an eclipse occurred which would appear to have been total
at Jerusalem or in its immediate neighbourhood. No date is given and a
date can only be guessed, and Hind guessed that the eclipse of 1133 was
the one referred to. He found that after leaving Scotland and crossing
Europe the central line of the 1133 eclipse entered Palestine near Jaffa
and passed over Jerusalem where the Sun was hidden for 4¼ minutes at
about 3h. p.m. From Nablous on the N. to Ascalon on the S. the country
was in darkness for nearly the same period of time. The alternative
eclipses to this one would be those of Sept. 4, 1187, magnitude at
Jerusalem 9/10ths of the Sun’s diameter; or June 23, 1191, magnitude at
the same place about 7/10ths; but these do not seem to harmonise so well
with the accounts handed down to us as does the eclipse of 1133.

In 1140, on March 20, there happened a total eclipse of the Sun visible
in England which is thus referred to by William of Malmesbury[82]:—
“During this year, in Lent, on the 13th of the Calends of April, at the
9th hour of the 4th day of the week, there was an eclipse, throughout
England, as I have heard. With us, indeed, and with all our neighbours,
the obscuration of the Sun also was so remarkable, that persons sitting
at table, as it then happened almost everywhere, for it was Lent, at
first feared that Chaos was come again: afterwards, learning the cause,
they went out and beheld the stars around the Sun. It was thought and
said by many, not untruly, that the King [Stephen] would not continue a
year in the government.”

The same eclipse is also thus mentioned in the _Anglo-Saxon
Chronicle_:—“Afterwards in Lent the Sun and the day darkened about the
noontide of the day, when men were eating, and they lighted candles to
eat by; and that was the 13th of the Calends of April, March 20. Men
were greatly wonder-stricken.” The greatest obscuration at London took
place at 2h. 36m. p.m., but it is not quite clear whether the line of
totality did actually pass over London.

It was long supposed that this eclipse was total at London, an idea
which seems to have arisen from Halley having told the Royal Society
anent the total eclipse of May 3, 1715, that he could not find that any
total eclipse had been visible at London since March 20, 1140. In
consequence of this statement of Halley’s, Hind carefully investigated
the circumstances of this eclipse, and found that it had _not_ been
total at London. The central line entered our island at Aberystwith, and
passing near Shrewsbury, Stafford, Derby, Nottingham, and Lincoln,
reached the German Ocean, 10 miles S. of Saltfleet. The southern limit
of the zone of totality passed through the South Midland counties, and
the nearest point of approach to London was a point on the borders of
Northamptonshire and Bedfordshire. For a position on the central line
near Stafford, Hind found that the totality began at 2h. 36m. p.m. local
mean time, the duration being 3m. 26s., and the Sun’s altitude being
more than 30°. The stars seen were probably the planets Mercury and
Venus, then within a degree of each other, and 10° W. of the Sun, and
perhaps the stars forming the well-known “Square of Pegasus.” Mars and
Saturn were also, at that time, within a degree of each other, but very
near the western horizon. It is therefore necessary to look further back
than 1140 to find a total solar eclipse visible in London.[83]

A solar eclipse seems to have been alluded to by certain historians as
having happened in A.D. 1153. We have the obscure statement that
“something singular happened to the Sun the day after the Conversion of
St. Paul.” A somewhat large eclipse having been visible at Augsburg in
Germany, on January 26, this may have been the “something” referred to.
It would seem that about 11/12ths of the Sun’s diameter was covered.

On May 14, A.D. 1230, there happened a great eclipse of the Sun, thus
described by Roger of Wendover[84]:—“On the 14th of May, which was the
Tuesday in Rogation Week, an unusual eclipse of the Sun took place very
early in the morning, immediately after sunrise; and it became so dark
that the labourers, who had commenced their morning’s work, were obliged
to leave it, and returned again to their beds to sleep; but in about an
hour’s time, to the astonishment of many, the Sun regained its usual
brightness.” This eclipse, as regards its total phase, is said by
Johnston to have begun in the horizon, a little to the N. of London, in
the early morning.

On June 3, A.D. 1239, and October 6, 1241, there occurred total eclipses
of the Sun, which have been very carefully discussed by Professor
Celoria of Milan, with the view of using them in investigations into the
Moon’s mean motion.[85] The second of these eclipses is mentioned by
Tycho Brahe.[86] He states that “a few stars appeared about noonday, and
the Sun was hidden from sight in a clear sky.” The eclipse was total in
Eastern Europe.

Dr. Lingard,[87] the well-known Roman Catholic historian, speaking of
the battle of Cressy, which was fought on August 26, 1346, says:—“Never,
perhaps, were preparations for battle made under circumstances so truly
awful. On that very day the Sun suffered a partial eclipse: birds in
clouds, precursors of a storm, flew screaming over the two armies; and
the rain fell in torrents, accompanied with incessant thunder and
lightning. About 5 in the afternoon, the weather cleared up, the Sun in
full splendour darted his rays in the eyes of the enemy; and the
Genoese, setting up their shouts, discharged their quarrels.” This was
not an eclipse, for none was due to take place; and the phenomenon could
only have been meteorological—dense clouds or something of that sort in
the sky.

On June 16, 1406, there was a large eclipse of the Sun, 9/10ths of its
diameter being covered at London; but on the Continent it seems to have
been total. It is stated that the darkness was such that people could
hardly recognise one another.

One of the most celebrated eclipses during the Middle Ages was
undoubtedly that of June 17, 1433. This was long remembered in Scotland
as the “Black Hour,” and its circumstances were fully investigated some
years ago by Hind. It was a remarkable eclipse in that the Moon was
within 13° of perigee and the Sun only 2° from apogee. The central line
traversed Scotland in a south-easterly direction from Ross to Forfar,
passing near Inverness and Dundee. Maclaurin[88] who lived in the early
part of the last century mentions that in his time a manuscript account
of this eclipse was preserved in the library of the University of
Edinburgh wherein the darkness is said to have come on at about 3 p.m.,
and to have been very profound. The duration of the totality at
Inverness was 4m. 32s.; at Edinburgh 3m. 41s. The central line passed
from Britain to the N. of Frankfort-on-the-Maine, through Bavaria, to
the Dardanelles, to the S. of Aleppo and thence nearly parallel to the
river Euphrates to the N.-E. border of Arabia. In Turkey, according to
Calvisius, “near evening the light of the Sun was so overpowered that
darkness covered the land.”

In 1544, on Jan. 24, there occurred an eclipse of the Sun which was
nearly but not quite total. The chief interest arises from the fact that
it was one of the first observed by professed astronomers: Gemma Frisius
saw it at Louvain.

Kepler says[89] that the day became dark like the twilight of evening
and that the birds which from the break of day had been singing became
mute. The middle of the eclipse was at about 9 a.m.

In 1560 an eclipse of the Sun took place which was total in Spain and
Portugal. Clavius who observed it at Coimbra says[90] that “the Sun
remained obscured for no little time: there was darkness greater than
that of night, no one could see where he trod and the stars shone very
brightly in the sky: the birds moreover, wonderful to say, fell down to
the ground in fright at such startling darkness.” Kepler is responsible
for the statement that Tycho Brahe did not believe this, and wrote to
Clavius to that effect 40 years afterwards.

In 1567 there was an annular eclipse visible at Rome on April 9. Clavius
says[91] that “the whole Sun was not eclipsed but that there was left a
bright circle all round.” This in set terms is a description of an
annular eclipse, but Johnston who calculated that at Rome the greatest
obscuration took place at 20m. past noon points out that the
augmentation of the Moon’s semi-diameter would almost have produced
totality. Tycho tells us that he saw this eclipse on the shores of the
Baltic when a young man about 20 years of age.

The total eclipse of February 25, 1598, long left a special mark on the
memories of the people of Scotland. The day was spoken of as “Black
Saturday.” Maclaurin states[92]:—“There is a tradition that some persons
in the North lost their way in the time of this eclipse, and perished in
the snow”—a statement which Hind discredits. The central line passed
from near Stranraer, over Dalkeith, and therefore Edinburgh was within
the zone of totality. Totality came on at Edinburgh at 10h. 15m. and
lasted 1m. 30s. From the rapid motion of the Moon in declination, the
course of the central line was a quickly ascending one in latitude on
the Earth’s surface, the totality passing off within the Arctic circle.

Kepler in his account of the new star in the constellation Ophiuchus[93]
refers to the total eclipse of the Sun of October 12, 1605, as having
been observed at Naples, and that the “Red Flames” were visible as a rim
of red light round the Sun’s disc: at least this seems to be the
construction which may fairly be put upon the Latin of the original
description.

The partial eclipse of the Sun of May 30, 1612, is recorded to have been
seen “through a tube.” No doubt this is an allusion to the
newly-invented instrument which we now call the telescope. Seemingly
this is the first eclipse of the Sun so observed, but it is on record
that an eclipse of the Moon had been previously observed through a
telescope. This was the lunar eclipse of July 6, 1610, though the
observer’s name has not been handed down to us.

The eclipse of April 8, 1652, is another of those Scotch eclipses, as we
may call them, which left their mark on the people of that country.
Maclaurin[94] speaks of it in his time (he died in 1746) as one of the
two central eclipses which are “still famous among the populace in this
country” [Scotland], and “known amongst them by the appellation of Mirk
Monday.” The central line passed over the S.E. of Ireland, near Wexford
and Wicklow, and reaching Scotland near Burrow Head in Wigtownshire, and
passing not far from Edinburgh, Montrose and Aberdeen, quitted Scotland
at Peterhead. Greenock and Elgin were near the northern limit of the
zone of totality, and the Cheviots and Berwick upon the southern limit.
The eclipse was observed at Carrickfergus by Dr. Wyberd.[95] Hind found
that its duration there was but 44s. This short duration, he suggested,
may partly explain the curious remark of Dr. Wyberd that when the Sun
was reduced to “a very slender crescent of light, the Moon all at once
threw herself within the margin of the solar disc with such agility that
she seemed to revolve like an upper millstone, affording a pleasant
spectacle of rotatory motion.” Wyberd’s further description clearly
applies to the Corona. A Scotch account says that “the country people
tilling, loosed their ploughs. The birds dropped to the ground.”

The eclipse of November 4, 1668, visible as a partial one in England,
was of no particular interest in itself but deserves notice as having
been observed by Flamsteed,[96] who gives a few diagrams of his
observations at Derby. He states that the eclipse came on much earlier
than had been predicted. It was well known at this time that the tables
of the Sun and Moon then in use were very defective, and it was a
recognition of this fact which eventually led to the foundation of the
Greenwich Observatory in 1675.

On September 23, 1699, an eclipse of the Sun occurred which was total to
the N. of Caithness for the very brief space of 10-15 secs. At
Edinburgh, about 11/12ths of the Sun’s diameter was obscured. In the
Appendix to Pepys’s _Diary_[97] there is a letter from Dr. Wallis
mentioning that his daughter’s attention was called to it by noticing
“the light of the Sun look somewhat dim” at about 9 a.m., whilst she
was writing a letter, she knowing nothing of the eclipse.

An eclipse of the Sun occurred on May 12, 1706, which was visible as a
partial eclipse in England and was total on the Continent, especially in
Switzerland. A certain Captain Stannyan who made observations at Berne,
writes thus to Flamsteed[98]:—“That the Sun was totally darkened there
for four and a half minutes of time; that a fixed star and a planet
appeared very bright; _and that his getting out of his eclipse was
preceded by a blood-red streak of light from its left limb, which
continued not longer than six or seven seconds of time_; then part of
the Sun’s disc appeared all of a sudden as bright as Venus was ever seen
in the night; nay, brighter; and in that very instant gave a light and
shadow to things as strong as the Moon uses to do.”

On this communication Flamsteed remarks:—“The Captain is the first man I
ever heard of that took notice of a red streak preceding the emersion of
the Sun’s body from a total eclipse, and I take notice of it to you [the
Royal Society], because it infers that the Moon has an atmosphere; and
its short continuance, if only six or seven seconds’ time, tells us that
its height was not more than five or six hundredths part of her
diameter.”

On the whole, perhaps, the most celebrated eclipse of the Sun ever
recorded in England was that of May 3, 1715. The line of totality passed
right across England from Cornwall to Norfolk, and the phenomenon was
carefully observed and described by the most experienced astronomer of
the time, Dr. Edmund Halley. The line of totality passed over London
amongst other places, and as the maximum phase took place soon after 9
a.m. on a fine spring morning, the inhabitants of the Metropolis saw a
sight which their successors will not see again till many generations
have come and gone. Halley has left behind him an exceedingly
interesting account of this event, some allusions to which have already
been made.

He seems to have seen what we call the Corona, described by him however
as a “luminous ring,” “of a pale whiteness, or rather pearl colour, a
little tinged with the colours of the Iris, and concentric with the
Moon.” He speaks also of a dusky but strong red light which seemed to
colour the dark edge of the Moon just before the Sun emerged from
totality. Jupiter, Mercury, Venus, and the stars Capella and Aldebaran
were seen in London, whilst N. of London, more directly under the
central line, as many as twenty stars were seen.

The inhabitants of England who lived in the reign of George I. were
singularly fortunate in their chances of seeing total eclipses of the
Sun, for only nine years after[99] the one just described, namely, on
May 22, 1724, another total eclipse occurred. The central line crossed
some of the southern countries, and the phenomenon was well seen and
reported on by Dr. Stukeley,[100] who stationed himself on Haraden Hill,
near Salisbury. The Doctor says of the darkness that he seemed to “feel
it, as it were, drop upon us ... like a great dark mantle,” and that
during the totality the spectacle presented to his view “was beyond all
that he had ever seen or could picture to his imagination the most
solemn.” He could with difficulty discern the faces of his companions
which had a ghastly startling appearance. When the totality was ending
there appeared a small lucid spot, and from it ran a rim of faint
brightness. In about 3½ minutes from this appearance the hill-tops
changed from black to blue, the horizon gave out the grey streaks
previous to morning dawn, and the birds sprang joyously into the air.

This eclipse seems to have had royal observers. It was watched at
Kensington apparently by the King or some of the royal family of
England, and at Trianon (Paris) by the King of France,[101] under the
competent guidance of Maraldi, Cassini and De Louville. It was the last
which was visible as a total one in any part of England.

On May 2, 1733, there was an eclipse of the Sun, which was total in
Sweden and partial in England. In Sweden the total obscuration lasted
more than 3 minutes. Jupiter, the stars in Ursa Major, Capella, and
several other stars were visible to the naked eye, as also was a
luminous ring round the Sun. Three or four spots of reddish colour were
also perceived near the limb of the Moon, but not in immediate contact
with it. These so-called red “spots” were doubtless the Red Flames of
the present century, and the luminous ring the Corona.

On March 1, 1737, a good annular eclipse was observed at Edinburgh by
Maclaurin.[102] In his account he says:—“A little before the annulus was
complete a remarkable point or speck of pale light appeared near the
middle of the part of the Moon’s circumference that was not yet come
upon the disc of the Sun.... During the appearance of the annulus the
direct light of the Sun was still very considerable, but the places that
were shaded from his light appeared gloomy. There was a dusk in the
atmosphere, especially towards the N. and E. In those chambers which had
not their lights westwards the obscurity was considerable. Venus
appeared plainly, and continued visible long after the annulus was
dissolved, and I am told that other stars were seen by some.” Lord
Aberdour mentions a narrow streak of dusky red light on the dark edge of
the Moon immediately before the ring was completed, and after it was
dissolved. No doubt this is a record of the “Red Flames.”

In 1748 Scotland was again favoured with a central eclipse, but it was
only annular. The Earl of Morton[103] and James Short, the optician, who
observed the phenomenon at Aberdour Castle, 10 miles N.-W. of Edinburgh,
just outside the line of annularity, saw a brown coloured light
stretching along the circumference of the Moon from each of the cusps.
A “star” (probably the planet Venus) was seen to the E. of the Sun.

The annular eclipse of April 1, 1764, visible as such in North Kent, was
the subject of the following quaint letter by the Rev. Dr. Stukeley:—

     “To the Printer of _Whitehall Evening Post_,—

     “In regard to the approaching solar eclipse of Sunday, April 1, I
     think it advisable to remark that, it happening in the time of
     divine service, it is desired you would insert this caution in your
     public paper. The eclipse begins soon after 9, the middle a little
     before 11, the end a little after 12. There will be no total
     darkness in the very middle, observable in this metropolis, but as
     people’s curiositys will not be over with the middle of the
     eclipse, if the church service be ordered to begin a little before
     12, it will properly be morning prayer, and an uniformity preserved
     in our duty to the Supreme Being, the author of these amazing
     celestial movements,—
     Yours,
                              RECTOR OF ST. GEO., Q.S.”[104]

The year 1766 furnishes the somewhat rare case of a total eclipse of the
Sun observed on board ship on the high seas. The observers were officers
of the French man-of-war the _Comte d’Artois_. Though the total
obscuration lasted only 53 secs., there was seen a luminous ring about
the Moon which had four remarkable expansions, situate at a distance of
90° from each other.[105] These expansions are doubtless those rays
which we now speak of as “streamers” from the Corona.

Curiously enough the next important total eclipse deserving of notice
was also observed at sea. This was the eclipse of June 24, 1778. The
observer was the Spanish Admiral, Don Antonio Ulloa, who was passing
from the Azores to Cape St. Vincent. The total obscuration lasted 4
minutes. The luminous ring presented a very beautiful appearance: out of
it there issued forth rays of light which reached to the distance of a
diameter of the Moon. Before it became very conspicuous stars of the 1st
and 2nd magnitudes were distinctly visible, but when it attained its
greatest brilliancy, only stars of the 1st magnitude could be perceived.
“The darkness was such that persons who were asleep and happened to
wake, thought that they had slept the whole evening and only waked when
the night was pretty far advanced. The fowls, birds, and other animals
on board took their usual position for sleeping, as if it had been
night.”[106]

On Sept. 5, 1793, there happened an eclipse which, annular to the N. of
Scotland, was seen and observed in England by Sir W. Herschel[107] as a
partial eclipse. He made some important observations on the Moon on this
occasion measuring the height of several of the lunar mountains.
Considerations respecting the shape of one of the Moon’s horns led him
to form an opinion adverse to the idea that there the Moon had an
atmosphere.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 79: _Historiarum Sui Temporis_, Lib. iv., cap. 9.]

    [Footnote 80: _Historia Novella_, Lib. i., sec. 8.]

    [Footnote 81: _Norman Conquest_, vol. v. p. 239.]

    [Footnote 82: _Historia Novella_, Lib. ii., sec. 35.]

    [Footnote 83: Letter in the _Times_, July 28, 1871.]

    [Footnote 84: Rogerus de Wendover, _Flores Historiarum_, vol. ii. p.
    535, Bohn’s ed.]

    [Footnote 85: _Sugli Eclissi Solari Totali del 3 Giugno 1239, e del
    6 Ottobre 1241_ in the _Memorie del R. Istituto Lombardo di Scienze
    e Littere_, vol. xiii. p. 275.]

    [Footnote 86: _Historia Cœlestis_, vol. i. p. 38.]

    [Footnote 87: _Hist. Engl._, vol. iii. chap. xviii. p. 50, 4to. ed.]

    [Footnote 88: _Phil. Trans._, vol. xl. p. 194, 1737.]

    [Footnote 89: _Astronomiæ Pars Optica_, c. viii. sec. 3; _Opera
    Omnia_, vol. ii. p. 315. Ed. Frisch, 1859.]

    [Footnote 90: Quoted by Kepler, as above, at p. 315.]

    [Footnote 91: _Commentarius in Sacroboscum_, cap. iv.; quoted in
    Kepler’s _Astronomiæ Pars Optica_, c. viii. sec. 3; _Opera Omnia_,
    vol ii. p. 316. Ed. Frisch, 1859.]

    [Footnote 92: _Phil. Trans._, vol. xl. p. 193; 1737.]

    [Footnote 93: _De Stellâ Novâ in Pede Serpentarii_, p. 115; Pragæ,
    1606.]

    [Footnote 94: _Phil. Trans._, vol. xl. p. 193; 1737.]

    [Footnote 95: V. Wing, _Astronomia Britannica_, p. 355.]

    [Footnote 96: _Historia Cœlestis_, vol. i. pp. 7 and 21.]

    [Footnote 97: _Diary of Samuel Pepys_, vol. vi. p. 208; Ed. M.
    Bright, 1879.]

    [Footnote 98: _Phil. Trans._, vol. xxv. p. 2240; 1706.]

    [Footnote 99: Being half a _Saros_ period (see p. 20, _ante_).]

    [Footnote 100: _Itinerarium Curiosum_, 2nd ed., vol. i. p. 180.]

    [Footnote 101: _Mem. de Mathématique et de Physique de l’Acad. des
    Sciences_, 1724, p. 259.]

    [Footnote 102: _Phil. Trans._, vol. xl. pp. 181, 184. 1737.]

    [Footnote 103: _Phil. Trans._, vol. xlv. p. 586. 1750. This is the
    man who under the designation of “Lord Aberdour” observed the
    eclipse of 1737 (_ante_).]

    [Footnote 104: Rev. W. Stukeley, Rector of St. George’s, Queen’s
    Square, London, _Diary_, vol. xx. p. 44, ed. “Surtees Soc.,” vol.
    lxxvi. p. 384.]

    [Footnote 105: Le Gentil, _Voyage dans les Mers de l’Inde_, vol. ii.
    p. 16. Paris, 1769.]

    [Footnote 106: _Phil. Trans._, vol. lxix. p. 105. 1779.]

    [Footnote 107: _Phil. Trans._, vol. lxxxiv. p. 39. 1794.]




                             CHAPTER XIII.

          ECLIPSES OF THE SUN DURING THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.


Observations of total solar eclipses during the 19th century have been,
for the most part, carried on under circumstances so essentially
different from everything that has gone before, that not only does a new
chapter seem desirable but also new form of treatment. Up to the
beginning of the 18th century the observations (even the best of them)
may be said to have been made and recorded with but few exceptions by
unskilled observers with no clear ideas as to what they should look for
and what they might expect to see. Things improved a little during the
18th century and the observations by Halley, Maclaurin, Bradley, Don
Antonio Ulloa, Sir W. Herschel, and others in particular rose to a much
higher standard than any which had preceded them. However, it has only
been during the 19th century, and especially during the latter half of
it, that total eclipses of the Sun have been observed under
circumstances calculated to extract from them large and solid extensions
of scientific knowledge. Inasmuch as it has been deemed convenient to
sort out and classify our knowledge under particular heads in previous
chapters, I shall in this chapter speak only of the leading facts of
each eclipse in such an outline form as will avoid as far as possible
unnecessary repetition.

In 1806 a total eclipse of the Sun occurred, visible in N. America.
Observations made in the United States have been handed down to us. Don
Joachin Ferrer, a Spanish astronomer, observed the eclipse at Kinderhook
in the State of New York. The totality lasted more than 4½ m.—a somewhat
unusual length of time. One or two planets and a few 1st magnitude stars
were seen. During the totality there was a slight fall of dew.

On Nov. 19, 1816, there occurred the first total eclipse of the Sun in
the 19th century, the central line of which passed over Europe. There is
only one known observation of the total phase, and this was by Hagen at
Culm in Bohemia, but he appears to have seen only the beginning of the
totality and not the whole of it.

A partial eclipse of the Sun visible as such in England but which was
annular in the Shetland Isles took place on Sept. 7, 1820. The only
reason why this is worth mention is for its political associations. The
trial of Queen Caroline was going on in the House of Lords, and the
House suspended its sitting for a short time for the sake of the
eclipse.

On May 15, 1836, there occurred an annular eclipse of the Sun, which
though it was nowhere total, may be looked upon as the first of the
modern eclipses the observations of which have taken such a great
development during recent years. The annularity of this eclipse was
observed in the N. of England and in the S. of Scotland; and it was at
Jedburgh in Roxburghshire that Mr. Francis Baily[108] observed that
feature of eclipses of the Sun now universally known as “Baily’s Beads.”
Some indications of the Red Flames were also obtained at places where
the eclipse was annular.

Probably it was the recognition of Baily’s Beads as a regular
concomitant of eclipses of the Sun, which helped to pave the way for the
extensive preparations made in France, Italy, Austria, and Russia for
observing the total eclipse of July 8, 1842. Many of the most eminent
astronomers of Europe repaired to different stations on the central line
in order to see the phenomenon. Amongst these may be named Arago, Valz,
Airy, Carlini, Santini, and O. Struve. The eclipse was witnessed under
favourable circumstances at all the various stations on the central line
across Europe, from Perpignan in France in the West to Lipesk in Russia
in the East.

Arago wrote[109] such an exceedingly graphic account of this eclipse
from what may be termed the standpoint of the general public, that I
will quote it at some length, because, with an alteration of date, it
might be re-written and applied to every total eclipse visible in much
populated tracts of country.

“At Perpignan persons who were seriously unwell alone remained within
doors. As soon as day began to break the population covered the terraces
and battlements of the town, as well as all the little eminences in the
neighbourhood, in hopes of obtaining a view of the Sun as he ascended
above the horizon. At the citadel we had under our eyes, besides
numerous groups of citizens established on the slopes, a body of
soldiers about to be reviewed.

“The hour of the commencement of the eclipse drew nigh. More than twenty
thousand persons, with smoked glasses in their hands, were examining the
radiant globe projected upon an azure sky. Although armed with our
powerful telescopes, we had hardly begun to discern the small notch on
the western limb of the Sun, when an immense exclamation, formed by the
blending together of twenty thousand different voices, announced to us
that we had anticipated by only a few seconds the observation made with
the unaided eye by twenty thousand astronomers equipped for the
occasion, whose first essay this was. A lively curiosity, a spirit of
emulation, the desire of not being outdone, had the privilege of giving
to the natural vision an unusual power of penetration. During the
interval that elapsed between this moment and the almost total
disappearance of the Sun we remarked nothing worthy of relation in the
countenances of so many spectators. But when the Sun, reduced to a very
narrow filament, began to throw upon the horizon only a very feeble
light, a sort of uneasiness seized upon all; every person felt a desire
to communicate his impressions to those around him. Hence arose a deep
murmur, resembling that sent forth by the distant ocean after a tempest.
The hum of voices increased in intensity as the solar crescent grew more
slender; at length the crescent disappeared, darkness suddenly succeeded
light, and an absolute silence marked this phase of the eclipse with as
great precision as did the pendulum of our astronomical clock. The
phenomenon in its magnificence had triumphed over the petulance of
youth, over the levity which certain persons assume as a sign of
superiority, over the noisy indifference of which soldiers usually make
profession. A profound stillness also reigned in the air; the birds had
ceased to sing. After an interval of solemn expectation, which lasted
about two minutes, transports of joy, shouts of enthusiastic applause,
saluted with the same accord, the same spontaneous feeling, the first
reappearance of the rays of the Sun. To a condition of melancholy
produced by sentiments of an indefinable nature there succeeded a lively
and intelligible feeling of satisfaction which no one sought to escape
from or moderate the impulses of. To the majority of the public the
phenomenon had arrived at its term. The other phases of the eclipse had
few attentive spectators beyond the persons devoted especially to
astronomical pursuits.”

The total eclipse of July 28, 1851, may be said to have been the first
which was the subject of an “Eclipse Expedition,” a phrase which of late
years has become exceedingly familiar. The total phase was visible in
Norway and Sweden, and great numbers of astronomers from all parts of
Europe flocked to those countries. Amongst those who went from England
were Sir G. B. Airy, the Astronomer Royal (then Mr. Airy), Mr. J. R.
Hind and Mr. Lassell. The Red Flames were very much in evidence, and the
fact that they belonged to the Sun and not to the Moon was clearly
established. Hind mentions that “the aspect of Nature during the total
eclipse was grand beyond description.” This feature is dwelt upon with
more than usual emphasis in many of the published accounts. I have never
seen it suggested that the mountainous character of the country may have
had something to do with it, but that idea would seem not improbable.

In the year 1858, two central eclipses of the Sun occurred, both
presenting some features of interest. That of March 15 was annular, the
central line passing across England from Lyme Regis in Dorsetshire to
the Wash, traversing portions of Somersetshire, Wiltshire, Berkshire,
Oxfordshire, Northamptonshire, Lincolnshire, and Norfolk. The weather
generally was unfavourable and the annular phase was only observed at a
few places, but important meteorological observations were made and
yielded results, as regards the diminution of temperature, which were
very definite. All over the country rooks and pigeons were seen
returning home during the greatest obscuration; starlings in many places
took flight; at Oxford a thrush commenced its evening song; at Ventnor a
fish in an aquarium, ordinarily visible in the evening only, was in full
activity about the time of greatest gloom; and generally, it was noted
that the birds stopped singing and flew low from bush to bush. The
darkness, though nowhere intense, was everywhere very appreciable and
decided. The second central eclipse of 1858 took place on September 7
and was observed in Peru by Lieutenant Gilliss of the U.S. Navy. The
totality only lasted one minute, and the general features of a total
eclipse do not appear to have been very conspicuously visible. Gilliss
remarks[110]:—“Two citizens of Olmos stood within a few feet of me,
watching in silence, and with anxious countenances, the rapid and
fearful decrease of light. They were wholly ignorant that any sudden
effect would follow the total obscuration of the Sun. At that instant
one exclaimed in terror “_La Gloria_,” and both, I believe, fell to
their knees, filled with awe. They appreciated the resemblance of the
Corona to the halos with which the old masters have encircled their
ideals of the heads of our Saviour and the Madonna, and devoutly
regarded this as a manifestation of the Divine Presence.”

The year 1860 saw the departure from England of the first great Ship
Expedition to see an eclipse. One was due to happen on July 18, and a
large party went out from England to Spain in H.M.S. _Himalaya_. Mr. De
La Rue took a very well-equipped photographic detachment, and his
photographs were eminently successful. This eclipse settled for ever the
doubt as to whether the Red Flames belonged to the Sun or the Moon, and
in favour of the former view.

The years 1868, 1869, and 1870 were each marked by total eclipses,
which were observed to a greater or less extent. In the first-named year
the eclipse occurred on August 18, the central line passing across
India. The weather was not everywhere favourable, but several
expeditions were dispatched to the East Indies. The spectroscope was
largely brought into play with the immediate result of showing that the
Corona was to be deemed a sort of atmosphere of the Sun, not
self-luminous, but shining by reflected light. The eclipse of 1869 was
observed by several well-equipped parties in the United States, and a
very complete series of excellent photographs was obtained.

To view the eclipse of December 22, 1870, several expeditions were
dispatched, the central line passing over some very accessible places in
Spain, Sicily, and North Africa. The English observers went chiefly in
H.M.S. _Urgent_, though some of them travelled overland to Sicily. The
expenses, both of the sea and land parties, were to a large extent
defrayed by Her Majesty’s Government. It deserves to be noted that so
great was the anxiety of the French astronomer Janssen to see this
eclipse, that he determined to try and escape in a balloon from Paris
(then besieged by the Germans) and succeeded, carrying his instruments
with him. The weather seriously interfered with the work of all the
observers who went out to see this eclipse, which was the more to be
regretted because the preparations had been on a very extensive and
costly scale. The chief result was that it was ascertained that the Red
Flames (hence forward generally called “Prominences”) are composed of
hydrogen gas in an incandescent state.

The year 1871 saw, on December 12, another Indian eclipse, noteworthy
for the numerous and excellent photographs which were obtained of the
Corona, of the rifts in it, and of the general details, which were well
recorded on the plates.

There was an eclipse visible in South Africa on April 16, 1874. Some
useful naked eye views were obtained and recorded, but as no
photographic work was done, this eclipse cannot be said to come into
line with those which preceded or followed it.

In the following year, that is to say on April 6, 1875, there was a
total eclipse of the Sun, visible in the far East, especially Siam; but
the distance from England, coupled with the very generally unfavourable
weather, prevented this from being anything more than a second-class
total eclipse, so to speak, although extensive preparations had been
made, and the sum of £1000 had been granted by the British Government
towards the expenses. A certain number of photographs were obtained, but
none of any very great value.

Perhaps of the next eclipse which we have to consider, it may be said
that the circumstances were more varied than those of any other during
the second half of the 19th century. The eclipse in question occurred on
July 29, 1878.

Several favourable circumstances concurred to make it a notable event.
In the first place, the central line passed entirely across the United
States; in other words, across a long stretch of inhabited and civilised
territory, accessible from both sides to a nation well provided with the
requisite scientific skill and material resources of every kind. But
there was another special and rare facility available: the central line
crossed the chain of the Rocky Mountains, an elevated locality, which an
American writer speaks of as overhung by “skies of such limpid
clearness, that on several evenings Jupiter’s satellites were seen with
the naked eye.” On the summit of a certain peak, known as Pike’s Peak, a
party of skilled observers, headed by Professor Langley, observed the
wonderful developments of the Corona, mentioned on a previous page. The
fact that such a display came under the eyes of man was no doubt mainly
due to the superbly clear atmosphere through which the observations were
made. That this is not a mere supposition may be inferred from the fact
that at the lower elevation of only 8000 feet, instead of 14000 feet,
the Coronal streamers were seen by Professor Newcomb’s party, far less
extended than Langley saw them. Perhaps the best proof of the importance
of a diaphanous sky is to be found in the fact that on the summit of
Pike’s Peak, the Corona remained visible for fully 4 minutes after the
total phase had come to an end. A comparison of the descriptions shows
that even at the elevation of 10,200 ft. the observers placed there,
whilst they were better off than those at 8000 ft., assuredly did not
see so much or so well as those at 14000 ft.

There occurred a total eclipse on July 11, 1880, visible in California,
but as the totality lasted only 32 secs. and the Sun’s elevation was
only 11°, not much was got out of this eclipse notwithstanding that it
was observed in a cloudless sky at a station 6000 ft. above the sea.

The eclipse of May 17, 1882, yielded several interesting and important
features although the totality was short—only about 1¼ minutes. Here
again favourable local circumstances helped astronomers in more ways
than one. It was in Egypt that the eclipse was visible, and Egypt is a
country which it is exceedingly easy for travellers to reach, and it is
also noted for its clear skies. These were doubtless two of the reasons
which combined to inspire the elaborate preparations which were made for
photographic and spectroscopic observations. The former resulted in a
very unprecedented success. One of Dr. Schuster’s photographs of the
totality showed not only the expected Corona, but an unexpected comet.

Though on more than one previous occasion in history the darkness which
is a special accompaniment of a total eclipse had caused a comet to be
seen, yet the 1882 eclipse was the first at which a comet had thrust
itself upon the notice of astronomers by means of a photographic plate.
It will be remembered that the political circumstances of Egypt in 1882
were of a somewhat strained character and probably this contributed to
the development of an unusual amount of astronomical competition in
connection with this eclipse. Not only did the Egyptian Government grant
special facilities, but strong parties went out representing England,
France, and Italy, although not perhaps in set terms at the direct
instigation of their respective Governments.

The next eclipse, that of May 6, 1883, had some dramatic features about
it. To begin with its duration was unusually long—nearly 5½ minutes, and
Mrs. Todd in her genial American style remarks:—“After the frequent
manner of its kind, the path lay where it would be least useful—across
the wind-swept wastes of the Pacific. But fortunately one of a small
group of coral islands lay quite in its line, and, nothing daunted, the
brave scientific men set their faces toward this friendly cluster, in
cheerful faith that they could locate there. Directed to take up their
abode somewhere on a diminutive island about which nothing could be
ascertained beforehand, save the bare fact of its existence at a known
spot in mid-ocean, the American observers were absent from the United
States more than three months, most of which time was spent in
travelling, 15000 miles in all, with ten full weeks at sea. Their tiny
foothold in the Pacific was Caroline Island, a coral atoll on the
outskirts of the Marquesas group.”

In spite of the unattractive, not to say forbidding, character of the
place to which they would have to go, parties of astronomers went out
from England, France, Austria, and Italy, and although rain fell on the
morning of the day the sky became quite clear by the time of totality
and the observations were completely successful. One of the pictures of
the Corona obtained by Trouvelot, an observer of French descent, but
belonging to the American party, has been often reproduced in books and
exhibited the Corona in a striking form. How few were the attractions of
Caroline Island as an eclipse station may be judged from the fact that
the inhabitants consisted of only four native men, one woman, and two
children who lived in three houses and two sheds.

On September 8, 1885, there occurred a total eclipse, which was seen as
such in New Zealand, but the observations were few, and with one
exception, unimportant and uninteresting. A certain Mr. Graydon,
however, made a sketch which showed at one point a complete break in the
Corona so that from the very edge of the Moon outwards into space, there
was a long and narrow black space showing nothing but a vacuity. If this
was really the condition of things, such a break in the Corona is
apparently quite unprecedented.

In 1886, on August 29, there occurred a total eclipse, visible in the
West Indies, which yielded various important results. It was unfortunate
that for the greater part of its length, the zone of totality covered
ocean and not land, the only land being the Island of Grenada and some
adjacent parts of South America. The resulting restriction as regards
choice of observing stations was the more to be regretted because the
duration of the totality was so unusually long, and therefore
favourable, being more than 6½ minutes in the middle of the Atlantic
Ocean. Parties of English, American, and Italian astronomers assembled,
however, at Grenada, and though the weather was not the best possible,
some interesting photographs were obtained which exhibited an unusual
development of hydrogen protuberances. The central line in this eclipse
not only stretched right across the Atlantic, but entered Africa on the
West Coast where a missionary saw the eclipse as a mere spectator, and
afterwards expressed his regret that no astronomers were within reach
with instruments to record the remarkable Corona which was displayed to
his gaze.

Though the unusual opportunities which, so far as the Sun and the Moon
were concerned, were afforded by the eclipse of 1886 were lost,
astronomers looked out hopefully for August 19, 1887, when another
eclipse was due to happen which, weather permitting, would be observable
over a very long stretch of land, from Berlin through Russia and Siberia
to Japan. Unusually extensive preparations were made in Russia at one
end and in Japan at the other, but clouds prevailed very generally, and
the pictures of the Corona which were obtained fell far short in number
and quality from what had been hoped for, having regard to the number
and importance of the stations chosen, and of the astronomers who made
their preparations thereat. An enthusiastic Russian, in the hopes of
emancipating himself from the risks of terrestrial weather at the
Earth’s surface, went up in a balloon to an elevation of more than two
miles. His enthusiasm was so far rewarded that he had a very clear view
of a magnificent Corona; but as, owing to some mischance, the balloon
rose, conveying only the astronomer and leaving behind his assistant who
was to have managed the balloon, all his time was engrossed by the
management of the balloon, and he could do very little in the way of
purely astronomical work.

The year 1889 afforded two total eclipses of the Sun for which the usual
preparations were made. The first occurred on New Year’s Day, and the
path of the shadow crossed the North American Continent from California
to Manitoba. The weather was nearly everywhere very favourable, and an
enormous number of observers and instruments were assembled along the
central line. The consequence was that a very large number of
photographs were obtained. It may be said generally of this eclipse,
that as it coincided with a Sun-spot minimum, it left us in a position
to learn very distinctly what are the characteristic features of a solar
Corona at a period which is one of rest and repose on the Sun, at least,
so far as regards visible Sun-spots.

The second eclipse of 1889 occurred on December 22, and should have been
visible off the northern coast of South America and on the West Coast of
Africa. Attempts were made to utilise the South American chances by
English and American parties, whilst a small expedition comprising
astronomers of both nations went to Cape Ledo in West Africa. The
African efforts failed entirely owing to clouds, but the South American
parties at Cayenne were successful. One very deplorable result, however,
arising out of the expedition to Cayenne was the illness and subsequent
death of the Rev. S. J. Perry, S.J., who was struck down by malaria and
died at sea on the return journey. None who knew Mr. Perry personally
could fail to realise what a loss he was both to astronomy generally and
to his own circle of friends particularly.

On April 16, 1893, there happened a total eclipse of the Sun, which was
successfully watched by a large number of skilled observers throughout
its entire length. Indeed it is believed that only one party was
unsuccessful. The line of totality started on the coast of Chili, passed
over the highlands of that country, across the borders of Argentina and
Paraguay, and over the vast plains and forests of Central Brazil,
emerging at about noon of local time at a short distance to the N.-W. of
Ceara on the North Atlantic seaboard. Crossing the Atlantic nearly at
its narrowest part, it struck the coast of Africa N. of the river
Gambia, and finally disappeared somewhere in the Sahara. The South
American observations were the most extensive and successful, the latter
fact being due to the circumstance that the sky at many of the principal
stations was pre-eminently favourable, owing to the clearness and
dryness of the atmosphere.

On Sept. 29, 1894, there was a total eclipse of the Sun, but as its
duration was brief and the zone of totality lay chiefly over the Indian
Ocean, practically nothing came of it.

Things seemed, however, much more promising for the total eclipse of
Aug. 9, 1896, and a very large number of observers went out to the North
of Norway hoping to catch the shadow at its European end, whilst a
yacht party went to Nova Zembla in the Arctic Ocean, and a few observers
travelled as far as Japan. So far as the very large number of would-be
observers who went from England to Norway were concerned, the eclipse
was a profound disappointment, for owing to bad weather practically
nothing was seen in Norway except on the West coast near Bodö, where the
weather was beautifully fine, but where no adequate preparations had
been made, because nobody believed that the coast would be free from
fog. Exceptionally fine weather prevailed at Nova Zembla, and the small
but select party who were kindly taken there by the late Sir G. B.
Powell, M.P., in his yacht, were very fortunate, and an excellent series
of photographs was secured. One important result obtained at Nova Zembla
was a full confirmation by Mr. Shackleton of Prof. Young’s discovery in
1870 of the “Reversing Layer,” a discovery which was long and vehemently
disputed by Sir Norman Lockyer. Fairly successful observations were made
of this eclipse in Siberia and Japan.

The last total eclipse of the Sun which has to be noticed as an
accomplished fact was the “Indian Eclipse” of Jan. 22, 1898, which was
very successfully seen by large numbers of people who went to India from
all parts of the world. As usual in all total eclipses of the Sun
nowadays, the photographers were very much to the front, and the
photographs of the inner Corona, taken by the Astronomer Royal, are
thought to have been probably the best that have yet been done. Amongst
the miscellaneous observations made, it may be mentioned that more stars
were seen during the second partial phases than during totality (a
circumstance which had been noticed by Don A. Ulloa as far back as
1778). It is stated also that a mysterious object was seen between Mars
and Venus by two officers of H.M.S. _Melpomene_, which was not put down
on the published chart as a star to be looked for. The identity of this
object has not been ascertained.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 108: _Memoirs_, R.A.S., vol. x. p. 5.]

    [Footnote 109: _L’Annuaire_, 1846, p. 303.]

    [Footnote 110: _Month. Not._, R.A.S., vol. xx. p. 301; May 1860.]




                             CHAPTER XIV.

       THE ELECTRIC TELEGRAPH AS APPLIED TO ECLIPSES OF THE SUN.


Amongst the auxiliary agencies which have been brought into use in
recent years, to enable astronomers the better to carry out systematic
observations of eclipses of the Sun, the electric telegraph occupies a
place which may hereafter become prominent. As it is not likely that
this little book will fall into the hands of any persons who would be
able to make much use of telegraphy in connection with eclipse
observations, it will not be necessary to give much space to the matter,
but a few outlines will certainly be interesting. When the idea of
utilising the telegraph wire first came into men’s minds, it was with
the object of enabling observers who saw the commencement of an eclipse
at one end of the line of totality, to give cautionary notices to
observers farther on, or towards the far end, of special points which
had been seen at the beginning of the totality, and as to which
confirmatory observations, at a later hour, were evidently very
desirable. It is obvious that a scheme of this kind depends for its
success upon each end (or something like it) of the line of totality
being in telegraphic communication with the other end, and this involves
a combination of favourable circumstances not likely to exist at every
occurrence of a total eclipse, and in general only likely to prevail in
the case of eclipses visible over inhabited territory, such as the two
Americas, Europe, and parts of Asia. This use of the telegraph was, I
think, first proposed as far back as 1878, by an American astronomer, in
connection with the total eclipse of that year. His proposal fell upon
sympathetic ears, with the result that arrangements were concluded with
the Western Union Telegraph Company of North America for the expeditious
forwarding of messages from northern stations on the eclipse line to
southern stations. Some attention was being given at that time to the
question of Intra-Mercurial planets, and it was thought that if by good
fortune any such objects were unexpectedly found at the northern
station, and observers at a southern station could be advised of the
fact, there might be a better chance of procuring an accurate and
precise record of the discovery. As it happened, nothing came of it on
that occasion, but the idea of utilising the telegraph having once taken
possession of men’s minds, it was soon seen what important possibilities
were opened up.

The want of telegraph organisation curiously made itself felt in the
Egyptian eclipse of 1882. It is stated in another chapter of this work
that during the total phase a comet was unexpectedly discovered. Now
comets sometimes move very rapidly (especially when they are near the
Sun), and had it been possible to have warned some observer to the E. of
Egypt to look out for this comet, and had he seen it even only a couple
of hours after it had been found in Egypt, some data respecting its
position might have been obtained which would have permitted a rough
estimate being formed of its movement through the heavens. Such an
estimate might have enabled astronomers to have hunted up the comet at
sunset or sunrise on the days immediately following the eclipse. As it
happened, however, the comet was not seen again in 1882, and, so far as
we know, may never be seen again.

It was not till 1889 that a complete organisation of a telegraph service
in connection with an eclipse was accomplished. The eclipse of January 1
of that year began in the Pacific and the line of totality touched land
in California, passing across North America to Manitoba. The first
Californian station was at Willows, and was occupied by a party from
Harvard College Observatory, who were supplied with an unusually
complete equipment of photographic apparatus, together with a large
camera for charting all the stars in the neighbourhood of the Sun, so as
to detect an Intra-Mercurial planet if one existed. The telegraph scheme
which had to be worked out was somewhat complicated, and one of the
chief actors in the scene has furnished a fairly full account of what
was done. First of all, a complete list of the instruments and of the
work proposed to be done by them had to be prepared. The weather
probabilities being everywhere very unsatisfactory, there was a
possibility of all degrees of success or failure, and one thing which
had to be prearranged for each station was a cypher code which should be
available for all the likely combinations of instruments, weather and
results. It was found that about one hundred words would suffice for the
necessary code, including words which would indicate in a sufficiently
precise manner the position of any new planet which a photograph might
disclose.

The following, being a part of the code prescribed for use at Willows,
will serve to indicate the nature of the whole scheme:—

_Africa_,  Perfectly clear throughout the whole eclipse.
_Alaska_,  Perfectly clear during totality.
_Belgium_, Clear sky for the partial phases, but cloudy for totality.
_Bolivia_, Entirely cloudy throughout the whole eclipse.
_Brazil_,  Observed all the contacts.
_Bremen_,  Observed three of the contacts.
_Ceylon_,  Made observations on the shadow-bands.
_Chili_,   Observed lines of the reversing layer visually.
_China_,   The Corona showed great detail.
_Cork_,    Obtained 40-50 negatives during totality.
_Corsica_, Obtained 50-60 negatives during totality.
_Crimea_,  Obtained 60-70 negatives during totality.
_Cuba_,    Observed a comet.

Upwards of twenty codes were prepared for the like number of stations,
and the observers were to report their results at the earliest possible
moment. On a rehearsal of the programme the thought occurred that the
sending and reception of so many cypher messages in the ordinary course
of business might lead to delays which would be productive of serious
inconvenience, and that the success of the whole scheme could be only
well assured if a special wire, in direct circuit from New York to the
eclipse stations in turn, could be dedicated to the work. Thanks to the
liberality of the Western Union Telegraph Company this privilege was
secured, and a branch wire was led across from the Company’s New York
office to the office of the _New York Herald_, which journal had
undertaken to be responsible for the non-astronomical part of the
business.

Mrs. Todd gives the following account of the final arrangements, and of
how they began to work when the moment for action arrived:—“From San
Francisco every California observer was within easy telegraphic reach,
and the wire thus extended by direct circuit to each eclipse station in
turn. From the editorial rooms of the _Herald_ Professor Todd was in
immediate communication with any observers whom he chose to call. As
previously intimated, arrangements had been made with the Harvard
astronomers at Willows to receive their message first and with the
utmost despatch, in order to test the feasibility of outstripping the
Moon. Shortly before 5 o’clock in the afternoon despatches began to come
in. Of course a slight delay was unavoidable, as the observers at the
various stations were some rods distant from the local telegraph
offices, and it would take a few minutes after the eclipse was over to
prepare the suitable message from the cypher code. On the astronomer’s
table in the _Herald_ office were a large map and a chronometer. The
latter indicated exact Greenwich time, and the former showed the correct
position of the Moon’s shadow at the beginning of every minute by the
chronometer. In this way it was possible to follow readily the precise
phase of the eclipse at every station. About the rooms and accessible
for immediate use were arranged the cypher codes pertaining to the
several stations and other papers necessary in preparing the reports for
the press. Everything being, as was supposed, in working order, New York
about a quarter of an hour before totality commenced inquired of Willows
the state of the weather. The answer was that the sky was getting dark,
and that there were no clouds anywhere near the Sun. At that time the
Moon’s shadow was travelling across the open waters of the Pacific. It
rapidly rushed along; totality came and went at Willows; a two minutes’
glimpse of the Corona was had, and the Corona swept rapidly eastwards.
After a brief interval Professor Pickering sent off from Willows a
telegram which began—“_Alaska_, _China_, _Corsica_,” and then the
connection failed. The break was located somewhere between California
and Utah, and more than half an hour elapsed ere the circuit was
re-established, and the rest of the message received. The remainder of
the thrilling incidents of that eventful day cannot possibly be better
told than in Mrs. Todd’s crisp and striking language[111]:—

“During this interval the lunar shadow, advancing over Montana and
Dakota, had left the Earth entirely, sweeping off again into space.
Still, however, the prospect that the telegraph might win the race was
hopeful. Had New York been located in the eclipse path as well as
Willows, with both stations symmetrically placed, the total eclipse
would have become visible at New York about an hour and a quarter after
the shadow had left California. Thus there was time to spare. Having
recovered the wire, Professor Pickering’s message was completed at
10h. 36m. [G.M.T.], the cypher translated, and the stenographer’s notes
were written out and despatched to the composing-room six minutes later.
The “copy” was quickly put in type, and the hurried proof handed to
Professor Todd at 10h. 50m., exactly an hour of absolute time after the
observations were concluded. Had the Moon’s shadow been advancing from
California toward New York, there was still a margin of several minutes
before the eclipse could become total at the latter place. In point of
fact, while the proof sheet of the first message was being read, the
lunar shadow would have been loitering among the Alleghanies. Man’s
messenger had thus outrun the Moon. The telegraphic reports of the other
astronomers were gradually gathered and put in type, and the forms of
the _Herald_ were ready for the stereotyper at the proper time, some
two hours after midnight. At 3 o’clock a.m. the European mails closed,
and the pouches put on board the steamship _Aller_ carried the usual
copies for the foreign circulation. Within twenty-four hours after the
observations of the eclipse were made near the Pacific coast, the
results had been telegraphed to the Atlantic seaboard, collected and
printed, and the papers were well out on their journey to European
readers.”

The foregoing narrative will make amply clear the future possibilities
of telegraphy as a coadjutor of Astronomy in the observation of total
eclipses of the Sun. And if the will and the funds are forthcoming, the
eclipse of May 28, 1900, will afford an excellent opportunity of again
putting to the test the excellent ideas of which our American friends
worked out so successfully ten years ago. The zone of totality in that
eclipse passing as it will through so many of the densely populated
Southern States of North America, and then through Portugal, Spain, and
Algiers, great facilities will present themselves for telegraphic
combinations, if political and financial difficulties do not interfere.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 111: There is a want of uniformity in Mrs. Todd’s
    references to times which I have not thought it necessary to put
    straight. “Greenwich Mean Time,” “Eastern U.S. Standard Time,” and
    “Pacific Time,” are all severally quoted in happy-go-lucky
    confusion.]




                              CHAPTER XV.

               ECLIPSES OF THE MOON—GENERAL PRINCIPLES.


In dealing with eclipses generally, but with more especial reference to
eclipses of the Sun, in a previous chapter, it was unavoidable to mix
up in some degree eclipses of the Moon with those of the Sun. There
are, however, distinctions between the two phenomena which make it
convenient to separate them as much as possible. Eclipses of the Moon
are, like those of the Sun, divisible into “partial” and “total”
eclipses, but those words have a different application in regard to
eclipses of the Moon from what they have when eclipses of the Sun are in
question. A little thought will soon make it clear why this should be
the case. A partial eclipse of the Sun results from the visible body of
the Sun being in part concealed from us by the solid body of the Moon,
and so in a total eclipse there is total concealment of the one object
by the other.

But when we come to deal with partial and total eclipses of the Moon,
the situation, is materially different. The Moon becomes invisible by
passing into the dark shadow cast by the Earth into space.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.—THEORY OF AN ECLIPSE OF THE MOON.]

Fig. 13 will make this clear without the necessity of much verbal
explanation. S represents the Sun, E the Earth, and _mn_ the orbit of
the Moon. It is obvious that whilst the Moon is moving from _m_ to _n_
it becomes immersed in the Earth’s shadow. But before actually reaching
the shadow the Moon passes through a point in its orbit at which it
begins to lose the full light of the Sun. This is the entrance into the
“penumbra” (or “Partial shade”). Similarly, after the eclipse, when the
Moon has emerged from the full shadow it does not all at once come into
full sunshine, but again passes through the stage of penumbral
illumination,[112] and under such circumstances (to speak in the style
of Old “Oireland”) the invisible Moon is very often not invisible, and
the part partially eclipsed is often not eclipsed, and when the Moon is
totally eclipsed it is frequently still visible. Of course the general
idea involved in all cases of a body passing into the shadow of another
body is that the body which so passes disappears, because all direct
light is cut off from it. In the case, however, of a lunar eclipse this
state of things is not always literally accomplished, and very often
some residual light reaches the Moon (of course from the Sun) with the
result that traces of the Moon may often be discerned. The laws which
govern this matter are very ill-understood. The fact remains that if we
examine a series of reports of observed eclipses of the Moon extending
over many centuries (and records exist which enable us to do this) we
shall find that in some instances when the Moon was “totally” eclipsed
in the technical sense of that word, it was still perfectly visible,
whilst during other eclipses it absolutely and entirely disappeared from
view. Such eclipses are sometimes spoken of as “black” eclipses of the
Moon, but the phrase is not a happy one. Many instances of both kinds
will be found mentioned in the chapter on historical lunar
eclipses.[113]

[Illustration: FIG. 14.—CONDITIONS OF ECLIPSES OF THE MOON.]

The different conditions of eclipses of the Moon are illustrated by Fig.
14 which must be studied with the aid of the remarks made in a former
chapter concerning the apparent movements of the Sun and Moon and their
nodal passages. Suffice it to state here that in Fig. 14 AB represents
the ecliptic, and CD the Moon’s path. The three black circles are
imaginary sections of the Earth’s shadow as cast when the Earth is in
three successive positions in the ecliptic. If when the Earth’s shadow
is near A the Moon should be at E, and in Conjunction with the Earth
the Moon will escape eclipse; if the Conjunction takes place with both
the Earth’s shadow and the Moon a little further forward, say at F, the
Moon will be partially obscured; but if the Moon is at or very near its
node, as at G, it will be wholly involved in the Earth’s shadow and a
total eclipse will be the result. In the case contemplated at G in the
diagram, the Moon is concentrically placed with respect to the shadow,
but the eclipse will equally be total even though the two bodies are not
concentrically disposed, so long as the Moon is wholly within the cone
of the Earth’s shadow.[114]

Just as in the case of the Sun so with the Moon there are certain limits
on the ecliptic within which eclipses of the Moon _may_ take place,
other (narrower) limits within which they _must_ take place, and again
other limits beyond which they _cannot_ take place. Reverting to what
has been said on a previous page[115] with respect to these matters when
an eclipse of the Sun is in question it is only necessary to substitute
for the word “Conjunction,” the word “Opposition”; and for 18½° and 15¼°
of longitude the figures 12½° and 9¼°. The limits in latitude will be
1° 3′ and 0° 52′ instead of 1° 34′ and 1° 23′. These substitutions
made, the general ideas and facts stated with regard to the conditions
of an eclipse of the Sun will apply also to the one of the Moon.

It is to be noted that whereas eclipses of the Sun always begin on the
W. side of the Sun, eclipses of the Moon begin on the E. side of the
Moon. This difference arises from the fact that the Sun’s movement in
the ecliptic is only apparent (it being the Earth which really moves),
whilst the Moon’s movement is real.

Eclipses of the Moon, though more often and more widely visible than
eclipses of the Sun, do not offer by any means the same variety of
interesting or striking phenomena to the mere star-gazer, and it was
long thought that they were in a certain sense of no use to science.
Now, however, astronomers are inclined to utilise them for determining
the diameter of the Moon by noting occultations[116] of stars by the
Moon, the duration of a star’s invisibility behind an eclipsed Moon
being a measure of the lunar diameter when such an observation is
properly transformed and “reduced.” Observations of the heat radiated
(or rather reflected) by an eclipsed Moon have also been made with the
interesting result of showing that during an eclipse the Moon’s power to
reflect solar heat to the Earth sensibly declines.

The duration of an eclipse of the Moon is dependent on its magnitude.
Where the eclipse is total the darkness, or what counts for such, may
last for nearly 4 hours, though this is an extreme limit rarely
attained. An eclipse of from 6 to 12 digits (to use the old-fashioned
nomenclature which has been already explained) will continue from 2½ to
3½ hours. An eclipse of 3 to 6 digits will last 2 or 3 hours, and a
smaller eclipse only 1 or 2 hours. The visual observations to be made in
connection with partial or total eclipses of the Moon chiefly relate to
the appearances presented by our satellite when immersed in the Earth’s
shadow. On such occasions, as has been already stated, it frequently
happens that the Moon does not wholly disappear, but may be detected
either with a telescope or even without one. It may exhibit either a
dull grey appearance, or more commonly a pinkish-red hue to which the
designation “coppery” is generally applied. Perhaps the most remarkable
instance of this was the eclipse of March 19, 1848.

Mr. Forster who observed the phenomenon at Bruges thus describes[117]
what he saw:—“I wish to call your attention to the fact which I have
clearly ascertained, that during the whole of the late eclipse of March
19 the shaded surface presented a luminosity quite unusual, probably
about three times the intensity of the mean illumination of the eclipsed
lunar disc. The light was of a deep red colour. During the totality of
the eclipse the light and dark places on the face of the Moon could be
almost as well made out as on an ordinary dull moonlight night, and the
deep red colour where the sky was clearer was very remarkable from the
contrasted whiteness of the stars. My observations were made with
different telescopes, but all presented the same appearance, and the
remarkable luminosity struck everyone. The British Consul at Ghent, _who
did not know there was an eclipse_, wrote to me for an explanation of
the blood-red colour[118] of the Moon at 9 o’clock.”

In striking contrast to this stands the total eclipse of Oct. 4, 1884,
which is described by Mr. E. J. Stone[119] as “much the darkest that I
have ever seen, and just before the instant of totality it appeared as
if the Moon’s surface would be invisible to the naked eye during
totality; but such was not the case, for with the last appearance of the
bright reflected sunlight there appeared a dim circle of light around
the Moon’s disc, and the whole surface became faintly visible, and
continued so until the end of totality.”

A total eclipse of the Moon which happened on January 28, 1888, was
observed in many places under exceptionally favourable circumstances as
regards weather. The familiar copper colour is spoken of by many
observers. The Rev. S. J. Perry makes mention[120] of patches of colour
even as bright as “brick red, almost orange in the brighter parts,” and
this, 20 minutes before the total phase began. Mr. Perry conducted on
this occasion spectroscopic observations for the first time on an
eclipsed Moon, but no special results were obtained.

Various explanations have been offered for these diversities of
appearance. Undoubtedly they depend upon differences in the condition of
the Earth’s atmosphere, such as the unusual presence or unusual absence
of aqueous vapour; but it cannot be said that the laws which control
these diversities are by any means capable of being plainly enunciated,
notwithstanding that the explanation generally in vogue dates from as
far back as the time of Kepler. He suggested that the coppery hue was a
result of the refraction of the Earth’s atmosphere which had the effect
of bending the solar rays passing through it, so that they impinged upon
the Moon even when the Earth was actually interposed between the Sun and
the Moon. That the outstanding rays which became visible are red may be
considered due to the fact that the blue rays are absorbed in passing
through the terrestrial atmosphere, just as both the eastern and western
skies are frequently seen to assume a ruddy hue when illuminated in the
morning or evening by the solar rays at or near sunrise or sunset.

Owing to the variable meteorological condition of our atmosphere, the
actual quantity of light transmitted through it is liable to
considerable fluctuations, and no wonder therefore that variations occur
in the appearances presented by the Moon during her immersion in the
Earth’s shadow.

It has been suggested that if the portion of the Earth’s atmosphere
through which the Sun’s rays have to pass is tolerably free from aqueous
vapour, the red rays will be almost wholly absorbed, but not the blue
rays; and the resulting illumination will either only render the Moon’s
surface visible with a greyish blue tinge, or not visible at all. This
will yield the “black eclipse”—to recall the phrase quoted elsewhere.
If, on the other hand, the region of the Earth’s atmosphere through
which the Sun’s rays pass be highly saturated, it will be the blue rays
which suffer absorption, whilst the red rays will be transmitted and
will impart a ruddy hue to the Moon. Finally, if the Earth’s atmosphere
is in a different condition in different places, saturated in some parts
and not in others, a piebald sort of effect will be the result, and some
portions of the Moon’s disc will be invisible, whilst others will be
more or less illuminated. Further illustrations of all these three
alternatives will be found amongst the eclipses of the Moon recorded in
the chapter[121] devoted to historical matters.

A few instances are on record of a curious spectacle connected with
eclipses of the Moon which must have a word of mention. I refer to the
simultaneous visibility of the Sun and the Moon above the horizon, the
Moon at the time being eclipsed. At the first blush of the thing this
would seem to be an impossibility, remembering that it is a cardinal
principle of eclipses, both of the Sun and of the Moon, that the three
bodies must be in the same straight line in order to constitute an
eclipse. The anomalous spectacle just referred to is simply the result
of the refraction exercised by the Earth’s atmosphere. The setting Sun
which has actually set has apparently not done so, but is displaced
upwards by refraction. On the other hand, the rising Moon which has not
actually risen is displaced upwards by refraction and so becomes, as it
were, prematurely visible. In other words, refraction retards the
apparent setting of one body, the Sun, and accelerates the apparent
rising of the other body, the Moon. The effect of these two
displacements will be to bring the two bodies closer by more than 1° of
a great circle than they really are, this being the conjoint amount of
the double displacements due to refraction.

Amateur observers of eclipses of the Moon will find some pleasure, and
profit as well, in having before them on the occasion of an eclipse a
picture of the Moon’s surface in diagrammatic form with a few of the
principal mountains marked thereon; and then watching from time to time
(say by quarters of an hour) the successive encroachments of the Earth’s
shadow on the Moon’s surface and the gradual covering up of the larger
mountains as the shadow moves forward. The curved lines represent the
gradual progress of the shadow during the eclipse named. This diagram,
ignoring the curved lines actually marked on it, may be used over and
over again for any number of eclipses, simply noting from the _Nautical
Almanac_ or other suitable ephemerides the points on the Moon’s disc at
which the shadow first touches the disc as it comes on, and last touches
the disc as it goes off. The _Almanac_ indicates these points by
stating that the eclipse begins, or ends, as the case may be, at a point
which is so many degrees from the N. point of the Moon measured round
the Moon’s circumference by the E. or by the W. as the case may be.

One other point and we have disposed of eclipses of the Moon. The shadow
which we see creeping over the Moon during an eclipse is, as we know,
the shadow cast by the Earth. If we notice it attentively we shall see
that its outline is curved, and that it is in fact a complete segment of
a circle. Moreover that the circularity of this shadow is maintained
from first to last so far as we are able to follow it. What is this,
then, but a proof of the rotundity of the earth? This shape of the
Earth’s shadow on the Moon during a lunar eclipse was suggested as a
proof of the rotundity of the Earth by two old Greek astronomers,
Manilius and Cleomedes, who lived about 2000 years ago, and is one more
illustration of the great powers of observation and the general
acuteness of the natural philosophers of antiquity.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 112: The time occupied by the Moon in passing through the
    penumbra, before and after a lunar eclipse, will generally run to
    about an hour for each passage. It will occasionally happen that the
    Moon gets immersed in a penumbra but escapes the dark shadow. Such
    an event will not be announced in the almanacs under the head of
    “Eclipses.”]

    [Footnote 113: See p. 197 (_post_).]

    [Footnote 114: The shadow is spoken of as being in the form of a
    cone because it is necessarily such on account of the light-giving
    disc of the Sun being so enormously larger in diameter than the
    light-receiving sphere of the Moon. This idea can be pursued by any
    reader with the aid of a lamp enclosed in a glass globe and an
    opaque sphere such as a cricket ball.]

    [Footnote 115: See p. 19 (_ante_).]

    [Footnote 116: As to occultations see chap. xxi. (_post_).]

    [Footnote 117: _Month. Not._, R.A.S., vol. viii. p. 132. March,
    1848.]

    [Footnote 118: A very striking chromolithograph of the lunar
    eclipses of Oct. 4, 1884, and Jan. 28, 1888, showing the contrast
    of—(1) an almost invisible grey Moon, and (2) a reddish-pink Moon,
    will be found in the German astronomical monthly, _Sirius_, vol.
    xxi. p. 241. Nov. 1888.]

    [Footnote 119: _Month. Not._, R.A.S., vol. xlv. p. 35.]

    [Footnote 120: _Month. Not._, R.A.S., vol. xlviii. p. 227. March
    1888.]

    [Footnote 121: p. 197 (_post_).]




                             CHAPTER XVI.

              ECLIPSES OF THE MOON MENTIONED IN HISTORY.


We saw in a previous chapter that we owe to the Chinese the first record
of an eclipse of the Sun. It must now be stated that the same remark
applies to the first recorded eclipse of the Moon, and Prof. S. M.
Russell is again our authority. He refers to a book called the
_Chou-Shu_ or book of the Chou Dynasty, said to have been found in 280
A.D. in the tomb of an Emperor who lived many centuries previously. In
this book it is stated that in the 35th year of Wen-Wang on the day
Ping-Tzu there was an eclipse of the Moon. Russell finds that this event
may be assigned to January 29, 1136 B.C., and that the eclipse was
total.

Next after this Chinese eclipse, in point of time, come several eclipses
recorded by Ptolemy, on the authority of records collected or examined
by himself. The three earliest of these came from Chaldæan sources.

The first of these eclipses was observed at Babylon, in the 27th year of
the era of Nabonassar, the 1st of the reign of Mardokempadius, on the
29th of the Egyptian month Thoth, answering to March 19, 721 B.C. The
eclipse began before moonrise, and the middle of the totality appears to
have occurred at 9h. 30m. p.m. The other two eclipses, also observed at
Babylon, occurred on March 8, 720 B.C., and September 1, in the same
year, respectively.

Three other lunar eclipses, recorded by Ptolemy, assisted Sir I. Newton
in fixing the _Terminus a quo_ from which the “70 weeks” of years were
to run which the prophet Daniel[122] predicted were to elapse before the
death of Christ. This _Terminus a quo_ dates from the Restoration of the
Jews under Artaxerxes, 457 B.C. The three eclipses which Newton made
use of were those of July 16, 523, November 19, 502, and April 25, 491
B.C.

Aristophanes, in “The Clouds” (lines 561-66), makes an allusion to which
has been supposed (but probably without adequate warrant, in Spanheim’s
opinion), to refer to an eclipse of the Moon. The eclipse, October 9,
425 B.C., has, moreover, been suggested as that referred to, but the
whole idea seems to me too shadowy.

An eclipse of the Moon took place in the 4th year of the 91st Olympiad,
answering to August 27, 413 B.C., which produced very disastrous
consequences to an Athenian army, owing to the ignorance and incapacity
of Nicias, the commander. The army was in Sicily, confronted by a
Syracusan army, and having failed, more or less, and sickness having
broken out, it was decided that the Athenians should embark and quit the
island. Plutarch, in his _Life of Nicias_, says:—“Everything accordingly
was prepared for embarkation, and the enemy paid no attention to these
movements, because they did not expect them. But in the night there
happened an eclipse of the Moon, at which Nicias and all the rest were
struck with a great panic, either through ignorance or superstition. As
for an eclipse of the Sun, which happens at the Conjunction, even the
common people had some idea of its being caused by the interposition of
the Moon; but they could not easily form a conception, by the
interposition of what body the Moon, when at the full, should suddenly
lose her light, and assume such a variety of colours. They looked upon
it therefore as a strange and preternatural phenomenon, a sign by which
the gods announced some great calamity.” And the calamity came to pass,
but only indirectly was it caused by the Moon!

Plutarch and Pliny both mention that eleven days before the victory of
Alexander over Darius, at Arbela in Assyria, there was an eclipse of the
Moon. Plutarch’s words (_Life of Alexander_) are, that “there happened
an eclipse of the Moon, about the beginning of the festival of the great
mysteries at Athens. The eleventh night after that eclipse, the two
armies being in view of each other, Darius kept his men under arms, and
took a general review of his troops by torch-light.” This seems to have
led to a great deal of disorderly tumult in the Assyrian camp, a fact
which was noticed by Alexander. Several of his friends urged him to make
a night attack on the enemy’s camp, but he preferred that his
Macedonians should have a good night’s rest, and it was then that he
uttered the celebrated answer, “I will not steal a victory.” Plutarch
enters upon some rather interesting moral reflections connected with
this answer, but which of course are foreign to the subject of this
volume. This eclipse happened on September 20, 331 B.C., and was total,
the middle of the eclipse being at about 8.15 p.m. It follows therefore,
that the celebrated battle of Arbela was fought on October 1, 331 B.C.

In 219 B.C. an eclipse of the Moon was seen in Mysia, according to
Polybius.[123] The date of September 1 has been assigned for this
eclipse which is said to have so greatly alarmed some Gaulish Mercenary
troops in the service of Attalus, King of Pergamos, that he had to get
rid of them as soon as he could—make terms with them to go home.

On the eve of the battle of Pydna when Perseus, King of Macedonia, was
conquered by Paulus Æmilius, there happened an eclipse of the Moon.
Plutarch in his _Life of Paulus Æmilius_, speaking of his army having
settled down in a camp, says:—“When they had supped and were thinking of
nothing but going to rest, on a sudden the Moon, which was then at full
and very high, began to be darkened, and after changing into various
colours, was at last totally eclipsed. The Romans, according to their
custom, made a great noise by striking upon vessels of brass and held up
lighted faggots and torches in the air in order to recall her light; but
the Macedonians did no such thing; horror and astonishment seized their
whole camp, and a whisper passed among the multitude that this
appearance portended the fall of the king. As for Æmilius, he was not
entirely unacquainted with this matter; he had heard of the ecliptic
inequalities which bring the Moon at certain periods under the shadow of
the Earth and darken her till she has passed that quarter of obscurity
and receives light from the Sun again. Nevertheless, as he was wont to
ascribe most events to the Deity, was a religious observer of sacrifices
and of the art of divination, he offered up to the Moon 11 heifers as
soon as he saw her regain her former lustre. At break of day he also
sacrificed oxen to Hercules to the number of 20 without any auspicious
sign, but in the twenty-first the desired tokens appeared and he
announced victory to his troops, provided they stood upon the
defensive.”

The astronomical knowledge ascribed in this account to Paulus Æmilius,
constitutes a very interesting feature in this record because the Romans
though they were good at most things, were by no means adepts at the
science of Astronomy. Livy[124] tells us that Sulpicius Gallus, one of
the Roman tribunes, foretold this eclipse, first to the Consul and then,
with his leave, to the army, whereby that terror which eclipses were
wont to breed in ignorant minds was entirely taken off and the soldiers
more and more disposed to confide in officers of so great wisdom and of
such general knowledge. This eclipse is often identified with that of
June 21, 168 B.C., but Johnson gives reasons why this cannot be the case
and that the eclipse in question was that which happened on the night of
June 10-11, 167 B.C., and commenced about midnight, whereas the eclipse
of 168 B.C. was nearly over when the Moon was above the horizon at Rome.
Stockwell, however, fixes on the eclipse of September 3, 172 B.C. as
that which was connected with the Battle of Pydna.

Josephus[125] speaking of the barbarous acts of Herod, says:—“And that
very night there was an eclipse of the Moon.” There has been some
controversy respecting the identification of this eclipse (the only one
mentioned by Josephus) which also is associated with Herod’s last
illness, it not having been easy to reconcile some discordant
chronological statements connected with the length of Herod’s reign and
the date when he began to reign. On the whole, probably, we shall be
safe in saying that the reference is to the eclipse of March 13, 4 B.C.
This was a partial eclipse to the extent of less than half the Moon’s
diameter, a defalcation of light sufficient, however, to attract public
notice even at 3 a.m., seeing that no doubt, even at that hour, the
streets of Jerusalem were in a state of turmoil owing to the burning
alive by Herod of some seditious Rabbis.

It should be stated, however, that Hind assigns the account by Josephus
to the eclipse which occurred on January 9, 1 B.C. On this occasion the
Moon passed nearly centrally through the Earth’s shadow soon after
midnight, emerging at 2.57 a.m. on the early morning of January 10,
local Mean Time at Jerusalem.

Tacitus[126] mentions an eclipse of the Moon as having happened soon
after the death of Augustus. This has been identified with the eclipse
of September 27, A.D. 14. Tacitus says:—“The Moon in the midst of a
clear sky became suddenly eclipsed; the soldiers who were ignorant of
the cause took this for an omen referring to their present adventures:
to their labours they compared the eclipse of the planet, and prophesied
‘that if to the distressed goddess should be restored her wonted
brightness and splendour, equally successful would be the issue of
their struggle.’ Hence they made a loud noise, by ringing upon brazen
metal, and by blowing trumpets and cornets; as she appeared brighter or
darker they exulted or lamented.”

There was an eclipse of the Moon on the generally recorded date of the
Crucifixion of our Lord, April 3, A.D. 33. Hind found that our satellite
emerged from the Earth’s dark shadow about a quarter of an hour before
she rose at Jerusalem (6h. 36m. p.m.), but the penumbra continued upon
her disc for an hour afterwards.

On Jan. 1, A.D. 47, a total eclipse of the Moon was seen at Rome, and on
the same night an island rose up in the Ægean Sea.

The total eclipse of Feb. 22, A.D. 72, noted by Pliny,[127] is the first
in which it is recorded that Sun and Moon were both visible at the same
time, the eclipse occurring when the Sun was rising and the Moon
setting.

Trithenius speaks of an eclipse of the Moon observed in the time of
Merovæus. Johnson identifies it with the eclipse of Sept. 15, 452 A.D.
It was from Merovæus that the line of French kings known as Merovingians
received their name.

On April 16, A.D. 683, according to Anastasius the Papal historian, the
Moon for nearly the whole night exhibited a blood-red appearance, and
did not emerge from obscurity till cockcrowing.

In A.D. 690 an eclipse of the Moon was observed in Wales. We are
told[128] that “the Moon was turned to the colour of blood.” This would
seem to be the first eclipse of the Moon recorded in Britain.

The _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ tells us that in A.D. 734 “the Moon was as
if it had been sprinkled with blood, and Archbishop Tatwine and Beda
died and Ecgberht was hallowed bishop.” The intended inference
apparently is that the Moon had something to do with the deaths of the
two ecclesiastics, but this theory will not hold water. Beda, it may be
remarked, is the correct name of the man generally known to us as the
“Venerable Bede.” It is evident that from the description of the Moon it
exhibited on that occasion the well-known coppery hue which is a
recognised feature of many total eclipses of our satellite. This eclipse
occurred on January 24, beginning at about 1 a.m.

On the night of January 23, A.D. 753, “the Moon was covered with a
horrid black shield.” This is the record of an eclipse. It occurred at
about midnight, and apparently we are entitled to infer that on this
occasion the Moon disappeared altogether, instead of being discoverable
during the total phase by exhibiting a coppery hue.

In A.D. 755 [or 756 in orig.], on November 23, there happened an
exceedingly interesting event which stands, I think, without a precedent
in the annals of science—an eclipse of the Moon contemporaneous with an
occultation of a planet by the Moon. This singular combination is thus
described in the annals of Roger de Hoveden[129]:—“On the 8th day
before the Calends of December the Moon on her 15th day being about her
full, appeared to be covered with the colour of blood, and then the
darkness decreasing she returned to her usual brightness; but, in a
wondrous manner, a bright star followed the Moon, and passing across
her, preceded her when shining, at the same distance which it had
followed her before she was darkened.” The details here given are not
astronomically quite correct, but let that pass; the writer’s intention
is fairly clear. Calculation shows that the eclipse occurred on November
23, and that the planet, which was Jupiter, was concealed in the evening
by the Moon for about an hour from 7h. 30m. to 8h. 30m. p.m., the
immersion taking place about the end of the total phase. This is the
first occultation of a star or planet by the Moon observed and recorded
in England.

Under the year 795 the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ says:—“In this year the
Moon was eclipsed between cockcrowing and dawn on the 5th of the Calends
of April; and Eardwalf succeeded to the kingdom of the Northumbrians on
the 2nd of the Ides of May.” This signifies that the eclipse happened on
March 28 between 3h. and 6h. in the morning, the method of dividing the
hours of night into equal portions of three hours each being still in
use. There was no eclipse in 795 on the date in question but there was
one in 796, so we may suppose an error in the year. This assumed,
Johnson found that the eclipse began at about 4h. a.m., was total for
nearly an hour, and ended at about 7½h., so that the Moon set eclipsed.
But the above assumption is dispensed with by Lynn who substitutes one
of his own.[130] For “5th of the _Calends_” he reads “5th of the
_Ides_,” which means April 9; and on that day in 795 he says there was
an eclipse of the Moon, but I have not found any other record of it.

In the year A.D. 800, according to the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_, “the
Moon was eclipsed at the 2nd hour of the night (8h. p.m.) on the 17th
day of the Calends of February.” Johnson finds that there was an eclipse
of the Moon on Jan. 15. The middle of the eclipse occurred at 8h. 34m.,
9/10ths of the Moon’s upper limb having been obscured.

Under the date of 806 the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ says:—“This year was
the Moon eclipsed on the Kalends [1st] of September; and Eardwulf, King
of the Northumbrians, was driven from his kingdom, and Eanberht, Bishop
of Hexham, died.” This eclipse was total, the totality lasting from
9h. 37m. to 10h. 59m. p.m.

On Feb. 15, 817, according to the _Annales Fuldenses_, an eclipse of the
Moon was observed in the early evening at Paris, and on the same night a
Comet was seen. This Comet is described by another authority as a
“monstrous” one and as being in Sagittarius on Feb. 5. The Chinese date
it for Feb. 17, and place it near the stars α and γ Tauri.

In 828 two lunar eclipses were seen in Europe, the first on July 1 very
early in the morning, and the second on the morning of Christmas Day.
The _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ thus speaks of the second eclipse:—“In this
year the Moon was eclipsed on Mid-winter’s Mass-night, and the same year
King Ecgbryht subdued the kingdom of the Mercians and all that was South
of the Humber.” The totality occurred after midnight. There is some
confusion in the year of this eclipse, the _Chronicle_ giving it as 827,
whilst calculation shows that it must have been 828. Lynn defines
“Mid-winter’s Mass-night” as Christmas _Eve_.

Under the date of 904 the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ says:—“In this year
the Moon was eclipsed.” There were two total eclipses of the Moon this
year, one on May 31, and the other on Nov. 25, and it does not appear
which one is referred to in the _Chronicle_ cited. Another writer,
Cedrenus, speaks of a great eclipse of the Moon this year which he says
foretold the death of a kinsman of the Emperor.

On October 6, 1009, there was a total eclipse of the Moon which
presumably is referred to in the statement that “this year the Moon was
changed into blood.”

On Nov. 8, 1044, there was a large partial eclipse in the morning. Raoul
Glaber[131] (a French chronicler who died about 1050) comments upon it
thus:—“In what manner it happened, whether a prodigy brought to pass by
the Deity or by the intervention of some heavenly body, remains known to
the author of knowledge. For the Moon herself became like dark blood,
only getting clear of it a little before the dawn.” Truly those times
were the “Dark Ages” in which ignorance and folly were rampant, seeing
that more than 1000 years previously the Greeks knew all about the
causes of eclipses.

Under 1078 the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ says:—“In this year the Moon was
eclipsed 3 nights before Candlemas, and Ægelwig, the ‘world-wide’ Abbot
of Evesham, died on St. Juliana’s Mass-day [Feb. 16]; and in this year
was the dry summer, and wildfire came in many Shires and burned many
towns.” Johnson found that a total eclipse of the Moon happened in the
early evening of Jan. 30.

On May 5, 1110, in the reign of Henry I., there occurred a total eclipse
of the Moon during which, says the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_, “the Moon
appeared in the evening brightly shining and afterwards by little and
little its light waned, so that as soon as it was night it was so
completely quenched that neither light nor orb nor anything at all of it
was seen. And so it continued very near until day, and then appeared
full and brightly shining. It was on this same day a fortnight old. All
the night the air was very clear, and the stars over all the heaven were
brightly shining. And the tree-fruits on that night were sorely nipt.”
The totality occurred before mid-night. It is evident that this was an
instance of a “black” eclipse when the Moon becomes quite invisible
instead of shining with the familiar coppery hue.

In 1117 there were two total eclipses, the first on June 16, and the
second on December 10. The latter is thus referred to in the
_Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_:—“In the night of the 3rd of the Ides of
December the Moon was far in [during a long time of] the night as if it
were all bloody, and afterwards eclipsed.” The totality commenced at
11.36 p.m.

It is recorded by Matthew Paris[132] in connection with the death of
Henry I. that “the Moon also was eclipsed the same year on the 29th of
July” [1135]. These words seem to indicate a total eclipse of the Moon.
Johnson gives the date as Dec. 22, 1135. If this is correct the text of
the _Chronicle_ must be corrupt. The whole eclipse was not visible in
England, the Moon setting before the middle of the eclipse. Stephen had
been crowned king the same day, namely Dec. 22.

On June 30, 1349, there was a total eclipse of the Moon visible at
London to which some interest attaches. Archdeacon Churton[133] connects
it with the following incident:—“The worthy Abp. Bradwardine, who
nourished in the reign of the Norman Edwards, and died A.D. 1349, tells
a story of a witch who was attempting to impose on the simple people of
the time. It was a fine summer’s night, and the Moon was suddenly
eclipsed. ‘Make me good amends,’ said she, ‘for old wrongs, or I will
bid the Sun also to withdraw his light from you.’ Bradwardine, who had
studied the Arabian astronomers, was more than a match for this simple
trick, without calling in the aid of the Saxon law. ‘Tell me,’ he said,
‘at what time you will do this, and we will believe you; or if you will
not tell me, I will tell you when the Sun or the Moon will next be
darkened, in what part of their orb the darkness will begin, how far it
will spread, and how long it will continue.’”

An eclipse of the Moon which happened when Columbus was at the Island of
Jamaica proved of great service to him when he was in difficulties owing
to the want of food supplies which the inhabitants refused to afford.
The eclipse was a total one, and so far as the description goes the
eclipses of April 2, 1493, and March 1, 1504, both respond to the
recorded circumstances: both were total and both occurred soon after
sunset. But, inasmuch as in the life of Columbus written by his son the
incident is placed nearly at the end of the work, there can be no doubt
that it is the later of the above eclipses which was the one in
question. The story is very graphically told by Sir A. Helps[134] in the
words following:—

“The Indians refused to minister to their wants any longer; and famine
was imminent. But just at this last extremity, the admiral, ever fertile
in devices, bethought him of an expedient for re-establishing his
influence over the Indians. His astronomical knowledge told him that on
a certain night an eclipse of the Moon would take place. One would think
that people living in the open air must be accustomed to see such
eclipses sufficiently often not to be particularly astonished at them.
But Columbus judged—and as the event proved, judged rightly—that by
predicting the eclipse he would gain a reputation as a prophet, and
command the respect and the obedience due to a person invested with
supernatural powers. He assembled the caciques of the neighbouring
tribes. Then, by means of an interpreter, he reproached them with
refusing to continue to supply provisions to the Spaniards. ‘The God who
protects me,’ he said, ‘will punish you. You know what has happened to
those of my followers who have rebelled against me; and the dangers
which they encountered in their attempt to cross Haiti, while those who
went at my command made the passage without difficulty. Soon, too, shall
the divine vengeance fall on you; this very night shall the Moon change
her colour and lose her light, in testimony of the evils which shall be
sent upon you from the skies.’

“The night was fine: the moon shone down in full brilliancy. But at the
appointed time the predicted phenomenon took place, and the wild howls
of the savages proclaimed their abject terror. They came in a body to
Columbus and implored his intercession. They promised to let him want
for nothing if only he would avert this judgment. As an earnest of their
sincerity they collected hastily a quantity of food and offered it at
his feet. At first, diplomatically hesitating, Columbus presently
affected to be softened by their entreaties. He consented to intercede
for them; and, retiring to his cabin, performed, as they supposed, some
mystic rite which should deliver them from the threatened punishment.
Soon the terrible shadow passed away from the face of the moon, and the
gratitude of the savages was as deep as their previous terror. But being
blended with much awe, it was not so evanescent as gratitude often is;
and henceforth there was no failure in the regular supply of provisions
to the castaways.”

Tycho Brahe observed a lunar eclipse on July 7, 1590. He writes:—“In the
morning about 3¾h. the Moon began to be eclipsed: in this eclipse it is
notable that both luminaries were at the same time above the horizon; a
like case which Pliny cites. For the centre of the Sun emerged when the
Moon was 2° elevated above the Western horizon, and when her centre was
setting, the centre of the Sun was elevated nearly 2°.”[135]

On August 16, 1598, there occurred a total eclipse of the Moon, observed
by Kepler,[136] in which during totality a part of the Moon was visible
and the rest invisible. He says, that while one-half of the disc was
seen with great difficulty the other half was discernible by a deep red
light of such brilliancy that at first he was doubtful whether our
satellite was immersed in the Earth’s shadow at all. This is an instance
of the simultaneous operation of those causes (whatever they may be)
which result in a totally-eclipsed Moon being sometimes wholly invisible
and sometimes entirely visible as a copper-coloured disc.

An eclipse of the Moon which happened on the morning of July 6, 1610,
may be mentioned as having been the first to be viewed through a
telescope. The eclipse was only a large partial one. The following
record of the fact is due to Tycho Brahe.[137] “The beginning of the
eclipse of the Moon as observed through the Roman telescope, appeared
like a dark thread in contact with the shadow”—a description which
cannot be said to be unduly explicit.

In 1620, on June 15, there was a total eclipse of the Moon, when during
the total phase “the Moon was seen with great difficulty. It shone,
moreover, like the thinnest nebula, far fainter than the Milky Way,
without any copper tinge. About the middle of the second hour nothing at
all could be seen of the Moon with the naked eye, and through the
telescope so doubtfully was anything seen that no one could tell whether
the Moon was not something else.” It is expressly stated, however, that
the sky was quite clear. Kepler also observed this eclipse, and says
that the Moon quite disappeared, though stars of the 4th and 5th
magnitudes were plainly visible.[138] In this same year 1620, there was
on December 9 another total eclipse, when “the Moon altogether
disappeared so that nothing could be seen of it, though the stars shone
brightly all around: she continued lost and invisible for a quarter of
an hour more or less.” This observation seems to have been made at
Ingolstadt.

Wendelinus mentions the eclipse of April 14, 1623, in connection with
the question of the visibility of the Moon when totally eclipsed. He
says, “but sometimes it so far retains the light derived from the Sun
that you would doubt whether any part of it were eclipsed.” This eclipse
was observed by Gassendi, and if the above record is correct, it is the
more remarkable seeing that the eclipse was not total, only 11/12ths of
the Moon’s diameter being obscured.

On April 25, 1642, on the occasion of a total eclipse, Hevelius[139]
noted that the Moon wholly disappeared when immersed in the Earth’s
shadow. Crabtree is stated by Flamsteed[140] to have observed this
eclipse, but he does not plainly state that he lost sight of the Moon.
Crabtree or his editor dates this eclipse for April 4; Ferguson for
April 15. There appears to be some muddle as between “old style” and
“new style.” Ferguson professing to be N.S. is evidently wrong. Hevelius
gives the double date, 15/25, which is evidently right.

On June 16, 1666, the Moon was seen in Tuscany to rise eclipsed, the Sun
not having yet set in the W.

On May 26, 1668, an eclipse of the Moon was in progress in the early
morning, when the Sun was seen to rise by members of the Academy of
Sciences who were observing the phenomenon at Montmartre near Paris.

On December 23, 1703, the Moon when totally immersed was seen at Avignon
showing a ruddy light of such brilliancy that we are told it had the
appearance of a transparent body illuminated by a light placed behind.
Johnson finds that the total phase took place in the early morning, and
lasted from 5h. 36m. to 7h. 22m. a.m.

The lunar eclipse of May 18, 1761, as observed by Wargentin,[141] at
Stockholm, furnishes a remarkable instance of the invisibility of the
Moon on certain occasions, when completely immersed in the earth’s
shadow. The total immersion of the Moon took place at 10h. 41m. p.m. The
part of the margin of the lunar disc which had last entered the shadow
was fairly conspicuous for 5 or 6 minutes after the immersion, and to
the naked eye exhibited a lustre equal to that of a star of the 2nd
magnitude; but at 10h. 52m. this part, as well as the whole of the rest
of the Moon’s body, “had disappeared so completely, that not the
slightest trace of any portion of the lunar disc could be discerned
either with the naked eye or with the telescope, although the sky was
clear, and the stars in the vicinity of the Moon were distinctly visible
in the telescope.” After more than half an hour’s search, Wargentin at
length discovered the whereabouts of the Moon by means of a faint light,
which was visible at the Eastern edge of the disc. A few minutes
afterwards, some persons of acute vision were able to discern, with the
naked eye, a trace of the Moon, looking like a patch of thin vapour, but
more than half the disc was still invisible.

An eclipse of the Moon, on March 29, 1801, was observed by Humboldt, on
board ship, off the Island of Baru, not far from Cartagena de las
Indias, in the Caribbean Sea.[142] He remarks that he was “exceedingly
struck with the greater luminous intensity of the Moon’s disc under a
tropical sky than in my native North.” Johnson makes Humboldt to refer
to the greater clearness of the “_reddened_ disc,” but these words do
not appear either in the German or in the English version.

A total eclipse of the Moon occurred on June 10, 1816. As observed by
Beer and Mädler and others, the Moon completely disappeared. The summer
of 1816, be it remembered, was very wet, and probably this had something
to do with the Moon’s invisibility at the eclipse in question.

On October 13, 1837, there happened a total eclipse of the Moon, of
which Sir J. Herschel and Admiral W. H. Smyth have left us interesting
accounts.[143] The changes of tint, both as regards times and places on
the Moon’s disc, recorded by the latter, are very remarkable. And the
tints themselves varied very much _inter se_: The Admiral speaks of
“copper,” “sea-green,” “neutral tint,” and “silvery,” as hues visible in
one part of the Moon or another, and at one time or another.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 122: Dan. ix. 24.]

    [Footnote 123: _Histories_, Book v., chap. lxxviii.]

    [Footnote 124: _Hist. Rom._, Lib. xliv., cap. 37.]

    [Footnote 125: _Antiq._, Lib. xvii., cap. 6, sec. 4.]

    [Footnote 126: _Annales_, Lib. i., cap. 28.]

    [Footnote 127: _Nat. Hist._, Lib. ii., cap. 3.]

    [Footnote 128: _Annales Cambriæ_, Rolls ed., p. 8.]

    [Footnote 129: _Annales_, Rogerus de Hoveden, Bohn’s ed., p. 5.]

    [Footnote 130: _Observatory_, vol. xv. p. 224. May 1892.]

    [Footnote 131: _Historiarum sui Temporis_, Lib. v., cap. 3.]

    [Footnote 132: _Chronica Majora_, Rolls ed., edited by the Rev.
    H. R. Luard, vol. ii. p. 161. Another version of this work is in
    circulation under the name of Rogerus de Wendover, _Flores
    Historiarum_. The passage here quoted appears in vol. i. p. 482,
    Bohn’s ed.]

    [Footnote 133: _History of the Early English Church_, 1870 ed., p.
    271.]

    [Footnote 134: _Life of Columbus_, p. 247.]

    [Footnote 135: _Historia Cœlestis_, vol. i. p. xci.]

    [Footnote 136: _Astronomiæ Pars Optica_, p. 276; _Opera Omnia_, vol.
    ii. p. 302; Frisch’s edition.]

    [Footnote 137: _Historia Cœlestis_, vol. ii. p. 921.]

    [Footnote 138: _Epitomes Astronomiæ_, p. 825; _Opera Omnia_, vol.
    vi. p. 482; Frisch’s edition.]

    [Footnote 139: _Selenographia_, p. 117.]

    [Footnote 140: _Historia Cœlestis_, vol. i. p. 4.]

    [Footnote 141: _Phil. Trans._, vol. lii. p. 210. 1762.]

    [Footnote 142: _Cosmos._ Trans. Sabine, vol. iii. p. 356; vol. iv.
    p. 483. Bohn’s ed.]

    [Footnote 143: _Cycle of Celest. Obj._, vol. i. p. 144; transcribed
    in G. F. Chambers’s _Handbook of Astronomy_, vol. i. p. 329.]




                             CHAPTER XVII.

            CATALOGUES OF ECLIPSES: AND THEIR CALCULATION.


This must of necessity be a brief chapter, so far as mere lines of text
are concerned, but it will not on that account be unimportant. It will
be evident to the reader that many more eclipses of interest have
happened, and will happen, than it has been possible to speak of in
these pages. Accordingly, as it is one of the main objects of this
series of volumes to create a thirst for knowledge, to be satisfied by
the study of other and bigger volumes, it will be desirable to furnish a
list of some of the various books and publications, in which eclipses
will be found catalogued or described in detail, so that readers
desirous of pursuing the matter further, may possess facilities for
doing so.

By far the most complete and comprehensive catalogue of solar eclipses
is that prepared some years ago by an Austrian astronomer, the late
Theodore Von Oppolzer of Vienna, and published under the title of _Canon
der Finsternisse_, in the Memoirs of the Imperial Academy of
Sciences.[144] This work supplies approximate calculations of about 8000
eclipses of the Sun, for a period of more than 3000 years, from November
10, 1207 B.C. (Julian Calendar), to November 17, 2161 A.D. (Gregorian
Calendar). There are appended 160 charts, of all the principal
eclipses; but as the charts only exhibit the beginnings, middles, and
ends of the eclipses dealt with, they are frequently misleading, because
the intermediate lines of path are, in many cases, more or less
considerably curved.

Another very important and comprehensive catalogue of eclipses, solar
and lunar together, will be found in the well-known French work, _L’Art
de vérifier les Dates_,[145] compiled by a member of the religious order
of St. Maur. One volume of this famous work contains eclipses from the
year 1001 B.C. to the Christian Era, whilst another volume gives a
similar catalogue from the year 1 A.D. to 2000 A.D. The other volumes
deal with chronological matters only. Although not strictly a work of
extreme astronomical exactness, yet _L’Art de vérifier les Dates_ stands
unrivalled as a record not only to subserve the purpose indicated by its
title, but of the bare facts of the eclipses which have happened during
the period of 3000 years stated above.

There has not been much done in England in the way of publishing eclipse
records or tables, past or future, but in the _British Almanac and
Companion_ for 1832 there is given a catalogue, which was useful in its
day, of eclipses, then future from 1832 to 1900, omitting, however,
solar eclipses hardly visible to any inhabited portion of the Earth, and
lunar eclipses where the part of the Moon’s diameter obscured was less
than 1/12th.

In by-gone days several attempts were made to gather together in a
tabular or paragraph form the details of eclipses which had happened,
and some of these have been important sources of information for the
guidance of us moderns. Foremost amongst these efforts must be named the
_Almagestum Novum_ of J. B. Ricciolus.[146] This work contains a
catalogue of eclipses observed from 772 B.C. to A.D. 1647, and continued
in tables to A.D. 1700. It is prefaced (pp. 286-8) by a long series of
quotations from classical authors relating to eclipses, some few of
which have already been mentioned in these pages.

Kepler paid much attention to eclipses, and left behind him a large mass
of notes and original observations. These will be found chiefly in his
_Astronomiæ Pars Optica_, c. vii. § 2, originally published at Frankfurt
in 1604. The most convenient and accessible edition of this is to be
found in Frisch’s reprint of all Kepler’s works.[147]

Tycho Brahe also gathered together from various sources many
observations of eclipses, and combined them with a number of his own,
the whole being published in his _Historia Cœlestis_.[148] Tycho Brahe
was a very interesting personage in spite of the fact that he went all
astray on the subject of the system of the Universe, and he well
deserves, what has been given to him, a book[149] all to himself. It is
peculiarly appropriate that I should give him a good word in this little
volume on eclipses, because it was the solar eclipse of Aug. 21, 1560,
which first seriously led him to take up astronomical pursuits, he being
then 14 years of age, and struck with wonder that eclipses could be
predicted.

A vast amount of historical and other information respecting eclipses
will be found in a book, the latinised name of whose author is Sethus
Calvisius. The title of the work is _Opus Chronologicum_.[150] The
historical matter is very much mixed, but the eclipses can be got hold
of through the Index, which is very full. P. Gassendi,[151] a well-known
astronomer of the 17th century, left behind him observations of many
eclipses observed by himself between 1628 and 1655. In a book entitled
_An Introduction to Universal Geography_,[152] one Nicolas Struyck in
the middle of the 18th century published a very full array of eclipse
observations collected with infinite pains from an endless variety of
authors ancient and modern.

In 1757 the well-known James Ferguson reprinted in his
_Astronomy_,[153] but in a very condensed form, all Struyck’s eclipses
from 721 B.C. to A.D. 1485. Then he carried on his catalogue to 1800 by
means of the materials furnished by Ricciolus and _L’Art de vérifier les
Dates_. Ferguson also invented a machine for illustrating mechanically
the circumstances of an eclipse. He called it the “Eclipsareon.” A full
description is given in his book, mentioned above, but I do not know
whether any such instrument is still in existence, or, if so, where it
is to be found.

Ferguson apologises[154] for the incompleteness of his eclipse
information in the following words:—“I have not cited one half of
Ricciolus’s list of portentous eclipses, and for the same reason that he
declines giving any more of them than what that list contains, namely,
that ‘tis most disagreeable to dwell any longer on such nonsense, and as
much as possible to avoid tiring the reader. The superstition of the
ancients may be seen by the few here copied. My author further says that
there were treatises written to show against what regions the malevolent
effects of any particular eclipse was aimed, and the writers affirmed
that the effects of an eclipse of the Sun continued as many years as the
eclipse lasted hours, and that of the Moon as many months.”

The most comprehensive (indeed almost the only) modern English book on
eclipses is the Rev. S. J. Johnson’s,[155] of which frequent use has
already been made in these pages. It contains a vast amount of matter
put together in a condensed form but the references to authorities are
rather defective and deficient. Less comprehensive in one sense yet
exceedingly valuable and interesting as a succinct summary of solar
eclipse knowledge up to the date of 1896 is Mrs. D. P. Todd’s excellent
little volume[156] which has been several times quoted on previous
pages. On various occasions in 1890 and following years Professor J. N.
Stockwell contributed to the American _Astronomical Journal_ a number of
papers[157] discussing in a very interesting and exhaustive manner many
of the eclipses recorded by the ancient classical authors. These papers
should be consulted by all who desire to realise the value of eclipse
records in connection with mundane chronology.

The calculation of eclipses is a matter of some interest. It is beyond
the scope of the present work to explain even in outline the methods in
use, but with the aid of the books mentioned below[158] a reader
possessed of the necessary time, mathematical knowledge, and patience,
will be able to pursue this matter as far as his inclination may lead
him. Johnson has found very useful the tables given in the eighth
edition of the _Encyclopædia Britannica_ (Article, “Astronomy”) but
strange to say these tables do not appear in ninth edition of that
famous work.

Lalande[159] has given numerous references to eclipses of the Sun during
the 16th, 17th and 18th centuries which may be useful to those who wish
to work at the history of eclipses.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 144: _Denkschriften der Kaiserlichen Akademie der
    Wissenschaften_, vol. lii. Vienna, 1887.]

    [Footnote 145: There are several editions of this work in
    circulation. The first (published in 1783) was in folio volumes,
    but the best known edition is in a large number of octavo
    volumes published in 1818 and following years. The eclipse lists
    will be found in the 1st volumes of the first and second series
    respectively. The French astronomer, Pingré, is responsible for
    them.]

    [Footnote 146: Published at Bononia (Bologna) in 1653.]

    [Footnote 147: _Omnia Opera_, vol. ii. pp. 311-16. Edited by Ch.
    Frisch. 8 vols. 8vo. Frankofurti-a-M., 1857-60.]

    [Footnote 148: A collected edition of Tycho Brahe’s works, edited by
    “Lucius Barettus,” was published at Augustæ Vindilicorum (Augsburg)
    in 1666. Lucius Barettus is an anagram for the real name Albertus
    Curtius.]

    [Footnote 149: J. L. E. Dreyer, _Tycho Brahe: a Picture of
    Scientific Life and Work in the Sixteenth Century_.]

    [Footnote 150: _Opus Chronologicum._ Francofurti ad Mœnum, 1650.]

    [Footnote 151: _Astronomica_, vol. iv. Lugduni, 1657.]

    [Footnote 152: _Inleiding tot de Algemeene Geographie._ Amsterdam,
    1740.]

    [Footnote 153: _Astronomy Explained upon Sir Isaac Newton’s
    Principles._ 2nd ed. 4to, pp. 167-79. London, 1757.]

    [Footnote 154: _Astronomy_, p. 178.]

    [Footnote 155: _Historical and Future Eclipses._ 2nd Ed., 1896.]

    [Footnote 156: _Total Eclipses of the Sun._ Boston, U.S., 1894.]

    [Footnote 157: _Astronomical Journal_, vol. x. pp. 25, 185; vol. xi.
    pp. 5, 28, 57; vol. xii. p. 121; vol. xiii. p. 73; vol. xv. p. 73;
    vol. xvi. pp. 89, 175.]

    [Footnote 158: J. Ferguson. _Op. cit._; W. D. Snooke, _Brief
    Astronomical Tables for the Expeditious Calculation of Eclipses_,
    8vo. Lond. 1852.]




                            CHAPTER XVIII.

                       STRANGE ECLIPSE CUSTOMS.


I had intended heading this chapter “Eclipse Customs amongst Barbarous
Nations,” but in these days it is dangerous to talk of barbarians or to
speak one’s mind on points of social etiquette so I have thought it well
to tone down the original title, otherwise I should have the partisans
of the “Heathen Chinee” holding me up to scorn as a reviler of the
brethren.

Did space permit a very interesting record might be furnished of eclipse
customs in foreign parts.

An eclipse happened during Lord Macartney’s embassy to China[160] which
kept the Emperor and his Mandarins for a whole day devoutly praying the
gods that the Moon might not be eaten up by the great dragon which was
hovering about her. The next day a pantomime was performed, exhibiting
the battle of the dragon and the Moon, and in which two or three hundred
priests, bearing lanterns at the end of long sticks, dancing and
capering about, sometimes over the plain, and then over chairs and
tables, bore no mean part.

Professor Russell, who is quoted elsewhere in this work with respect to
Chinese eclipses, makes the following remarks in regard to what happens
now in China when eclipses occur:—“It will be interesting here to note
that, even at present, by Imperial command, special rites are performed
during solar and lunar eclipses. A president from each of the six
boards, with two inferior officials, dressed in their official clothes,
proceed to the T’ai-Ch’ang-Ssu. When the eclipse begins they change
their robes for common garments made of plain black material, and
kneeling down, burn incense. The president then beats one stroke on a
gong, and the ceremony is taken up by all the attendant officials.”

A writer in _Chambers’s Journal_[161] in an article entitled “The Hindu
view of the late Eclipse,” gives an interesting and original account of
divers Hindu superstitions and ceremonies which came under his notice in
connection with the total eclipse of the Sun of Aug. 18, 1868. He
remarks that “European science has as yet produced but little effect
upon the minds of the superstitious masses of India. Of the many
millions who witnessed the eclipse of the 18th of August last there were
comparatively few who did not verily believe that it was caused by the
dragon Rahu in his endeavour to swallow up the Lord of Day.... The
pious Hindu, before the eclipse comes on, takes a torch, and begins to
search his house and carefully removes all cooked food, and all water
for drinking purposes. Such food and water, by the eclipse, incur
_Grahana seshah_, that is, uncleanness, and are rendered unfit for use.
Some, with less scruples of conscience, declare that the food may be
preserved by placing on it _dharba_ or _Kusa grass_,” and much more to
the like effect is duly set out in the interesting article cited.

During the total eclipse of the Sun of Aug. 7, 1869, the following
incident is noted[162] to have occurred at a station on the Chilkaht
river, in Alaska, North America, frequented by Indians:—

“About the time the Sun was half obscured the chief Koh-Klux and all the
Indians had disappeared from around the observing tent; they left off
fishing on the river banks; all employments were discontinued; and every
soul disappeared; nor was a sound heard throughout the village of 53
houses. The natives had been warned of what would take place, but
doubted the prediction. When it did occur they looked upon me as the
cause of the Sun’s being ‘very sick and going to bed.’ They were
thoroughly alarmed, and overwhelmed with an undefinable dread.”

A still more thrilling incident is thus recorded[163] of the eclipse of
July 29, 1878, by a witness at Fort Sill, Indian Territory, U.S.:—

“On Monday last we were permitted to see the eclipse of the Sun in a
beautiful bright sky. Not a cloud was visible. We had made ample
preparation, laying in a stock of smoked glass several days in advance.
It was the grandest sight I ever beheld, but it frightened the Indians
badly. Some of them threw themselves upon their knees and invoked the
Divine blessing; others flung themselves flat on the ground, face
downward; others cried and yelled in frantic excitement and terror.
Finally one old fellow stepped from the door of his lodge, pistol in
hand, and fixing his eyes on the darkened Sun, mumbled a few
unintelligible words and raising his arm took direct aim at the
luminary, fired off his pistol, and after throwing his arms about his
head in a series of extraordinary gesticulations retreated to his own
quarters. As it happened, that very instant was the conclusion of
totality. The Indians beheld the glorious orb of day once more peep
forth, and it was unanimously voted that the timely discharge of that
pistol was the only thing that drove away the shadow and saved them from
the public inconvenience that would have certainly resulted from the
entire extinction of the Sun.”

A certain Mr. F. Kerigan, in a book published in 1844, made the
following remarks on ancient Jewish ideas respecting eclipses:—

“The Israelites, like their benighted neighbours, esteemed an eclipse of
either luminary as a supernatural and inauspicious omen, which filled
them with the most gloomy and fearful apprehensions: as may fairly be
deduced from the 8th chapter of Ezekiel, v. 15: ‘Then he brought me to
the door of the Lord’s House, which was towards the N.; and, behold
there sat women weeping for Tammuz.’ Now Tammuz is the name under which
Adonis was known in Palestine: he was the favourite of Venus, or
Astarte, the principal goddess of the Philistines and Phœnicians. Being
killed by a wild boar, the prevailing superstition of the age induced
the uninformed multitude to believe that when the Moon was eclipsed, it
was in complement to their beloved goddess Venus or Astarte, who,
concealed behind the full Moon, sat weeping under a dark veil for the
loss of her beloved Tammuz or Adonis.”[164]

The African travellers, R. and J. Lander, have given[165] a graphic
account of what took place on the occasion of the eclipse of the Moon of
Sept. 2, 1830, as witnessed by themselves:—“The earlier part of the
evening had been mild, serene, and remarkably pleasant. The Moon had
arisen with uncommon lustre, and being at the full, her appearance was
extremely delightful. It was the conclusion of the holidays, and many of
the people were enjoying the delicious coolness of a serene night, and
resting from the laborious exertions of the day; but when the Moon
became gradually obscured, fear overcame every one. As the eclipse
increased they became more terrified. All ran in great distress to
inform their sovereign of the circumstance, for there was not a single
cloud to cause so deep a shadow, and they could not comprehend the
nature or meaning of an eclipse.... Groups of men were blowing on
trumpets, which produced a harsh and discordant sound; some were
employed in beating old drums, others again were blowing on bullocks’
horns.... The diminished light, when the eclipse was complete, was just
sufficient for us to distinguish the various groups of people, and
contributed in no small degree to render the scene more imposing. If a
European, a stranger to Africa, had been placed on a sudden in the midst
of the terror-struck people, he would have imagined himself to be among
a legion of demons, holding a revel over a fallen spirit.”

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 159: _Bibliographie Astronomique._ Paris, 1803. Indexed at
    p. 938.]

    [Footnote 160: _Authentic Account of an Embassy to China_, by Sir G.
    Staunton.]

    [Footnote 161: Fourth Series, vol. v. p. 676. October 24, 1868.]

    [Footnote 162: _Report U.S. Coast Survey_, 1869, p. 179.]

    [Footnote 163: Letter published in the _Philadelphia Inquirer_.]

    [Footnote 164: _A Practical Treatise on Eclipses_, p. 2.]

    [Footnote 165: _Journal of an Expedition to Explore the Niger_, vol.
    i. p. 366.]




                             CHAPTER XIX.

                ECLIPSES IN SHAKESPEARE AND THE POETS.


The sound of these words may be large but facts do not bear out the
theory, for eclipses do not appear to have captivated our great poets to
anything like the extent that Moon, Stars, and Comets have done.

Shakespeare has a few allusions to eclipses, but they are not of prime
importance. In _Macbeth_ we find:—

    “And slips of yew
    Shivered in the Moon’s eclipse”
            —Act iv. sc. 1.

the precise meaning of which is not very obvious. “Shivered” of course
means divided into pieces, but the idea intended is obscure.

The next quotation is more comprehensive and reflects more plainly the
current of thought prevalent in Shakespeare’s day, albeit here again the
word “eclipse” will be found to stand without much definite connection
with what goes before. However the reader shall judge for himself:—

    “As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
    Disasters in the Sun; and the moist star,
    Upon whose influence Neptune’s Empire stands,
    Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.”
            —_Hamlet_, act i. sc. 1.

In _King Lear_ we seem to come upon something very definitely
historical, but I am not able to say what it is. The Earl of Gloster
says:—

    “These late eclipses in the Sun and Moon portend no good to us.”

With this, Edmund, Gloster’s son, apparently agrees, for he exclaims:—

    “These eclipses do portend these divisions.”
            —Act i. sc. 2.

In _Othello_, the Moor of Venice himself, in a moment of excitement,
says:—

    “O, insupportable! O, heavy hour!
    Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse
    Of Sun and Moon, and that the affrighted globe
    Should yawn at alteration.”
            —Act v. sc. 2.

In _Anthony and Cleopatra_ we find Anthony expressing what our
forefathers so often thought in connection with astronomical matters:—

    “Alack, our terrine Moon is now eclipsed;
    And it portends alone
    The fall of Anthony!”
            —Act iii. sc. 11.

Milton has an allusion to an eclipse of the Sun which possesses a
two-fold interest—intrinsic and extrinsic. The former feature will be
self-evident when the passage is read. The poet, in describing[166] the
faded splendour of the fallen archangel, compares him to the Sun seen
under circumstances which have temporarily deprived it of its normal
brilliancy and glory:—

            “As when the Sun new-risen
    Looks through the horizontal misty air
    Shorn of his beams, or, from behind the Moon
    In dim eclipse, disastrous twilight sheds
    On half the nations, and with fear of change
    Perplexes Monarchs.”

It has been well said by Dr. Orchard[167] that “this passage affords us
an example of the sublimity of Milton’s imagination and of his skill in
adapting the grandest phenomena of nature to the illustration of his
subject.”

What I alluded to in saying that extrinsic interest attached to this
quotation, is the fact that these lines might have caused the
suppression of the poem as a whole. Mrs. Todd puts the matter
thus:—“_Paradise Lost_ was begun probably in 1658, although not finished
until 1663, nor its thorough revision completed until 1665. The
censorship still existed, and Tomkyns (one of the chaplains through whom
the Archbishop gave or refused license), although a broader-minded man
than many of his day, found this passage especially objectionable. The
poem was allowed to see the light only through the interposition of a
friend of Milton. Upon such slender chances may hang the life of an
incomparable work of art! But it is easy to see that in the turbulent
days when Charles the Second had returned to power, after the death of
Cromwell, these lines should have been deemed dangerously suggestive, in
imputing to monarchs ‘perplexity’ and ‘fear of change.’”

Other allusions to eclipses by Milton will be found as follows:—

            Through the air she comes,
    “Lur’d with the smell of infant blood, to dance
    With Lapland witches, while the labouring Moon
    Eclipses at their charms.”
            —_Paradise Lost_, Bk. ii. lines 663-6.

    “So saying, he dismiss’d them; they with speed
    Their course through thickest constellation held,
    Spreading their bane; the blasted stars look’d wan,
    And planets, planet-struck, real eclipse,
    Then suffer’d.”
            —_Paradise Lost_, Bk. x. lines 410-14.

    “O dark, dark, dark, amid the blaze of Noon,
    Irrecoverably dark, total eclipse,
    Without all hope of day!”
            —_Samson Agonistes_, Lines 80-2.

    “It was that fatal and perfidious bark,
    Built in th’ eclipse, and rigg’d with curses dark,
    That sunk so low that sacred heart of thine.”
            —_Lycidas_, Lines 100-2.

Pope, in the following lines, may be presumed to mean that the covering
up of the Sun by the Moon, during a total eclipse, results in the Moon
becoming visible, at the cost of the Sun’s disappearance:—

    “For Envy’d wit, like Sol eclips’d, makes known
    Th’ opposing body’s grossness, not its own.”
            —_Essay on Criticism_, Lines 469-70.

I have not attempted to pursue this matter through the pages of our
modern poets, but it is not unlikely that Scott and Tennyson
(especially) would have something on the subject of eclipses.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 166: _Paradise Lost_, Book i., lines 594-9.]

    [Footnote 167: _The Astronomy of Milton_, p. 259.]




                              CHAPTER XX.

           BRIEF HINTS TO OBSERVERS OF ECLIPSES OF THE SUN.


A few words (they must be few for lack of space) may usefully be added,
by way of advice, to persons proposing to choose a suitable locality at
which to station themselves for viewing a total eclipse of the Sun. To
begin with, of course they ought to get as close as possible to the
central line, say within 10 or 20 miles at the most; this matter
settled, the next important point is to find out where the duration of
the totality will be longest, coupled with the Sun at its maximum
elevation above the horizon (to escape the influence of mists and fogs).
No advice, properly so-called, can be given on these points, because
they depend on the special circumstances of every eclipse, and must be
ascertained _ad hoc_ from the _Nautical Almanac_.

In anticipation of a forthcoming eclipse, it is very important to know
beforehand the probabilities of weather. If the _locus in quo_ of an
expected eclipse is in a civilised country, there will generally not be
much difficulty in obtaining a certain amount of information as to this
6 or 12 months in advance. But inasmuch as total eclipses of the Sun,
and often the best of them, are visible only in uncivilised countries or
over trackless wastes, the problem becomes a complicated and anxious
one. In such cases it is exceedingly desirable, where competent
observers (including money) are available, that preliminary notes of
weather should be made for a year or even two years in advance. There is
in one sense no difficulty as to this, for all the mathematical local
elements of every eclipse are always made public three or four years in
advance through the pages of books like the _Nautical Almanac_, the
_Connaissance des Temps_, the _Berliner Jahrbuch_, &c. One difficulty
always confronts every eclipse expedition. If an out-of-the-way part of
the world has to be visited, accessible by sea, transport from England,
say, to the foreign shore is not usually a matter of difficulty, because
Government ships are often placed at the disposal of astronomers. But
the gravest difficulties often have to be faced after the arrival at the
foreign shore, and for this reason. Every sea coast is, as a general
rule applicable to the whole world, bad for astronomical observations.
The problem then which has to be solved is, how best to get away from
the coast inland to a high hill, and to find the means of transporting
thither heavy packing-cases of instruments, personal luggage, creature
comforts, and, if needs be, tents and the other accessories of camp
life. Let not the reader of either sex take fright at the idea of
sleeping under a tent. I speak with considerable experience when I say
that, given fine or fairly fine weather, nothing is more enjoyable in a
temperate climate. Under the term “creature comforts” I mean such things
as tinned soups and preserved provisions which nowadays can so easily be
purchased everywhere in England, and of such good quality. I would
recommend these being taken even when the eclipse traveller expects to
be lodged in the dwelling-places of civilised nations. Of course, if in
order to see his eclipse he has to go into the wilds of America, Asia,
or Africa, he must start fully equipped with all those personal
_impedimenta_ which will be found scheduled in the books mentioned in
the footnote.[168]

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 168: _The Tourists’ Pocket-Book_, 1s. (Philip); F.
    Galton’s _Art of Travel_, 7s. 6d. (Murray); Royal Geographical
    Society’s _Hints to Travellers_, 5s. (R. G. S., Savile Row). &c.]




                             CHAPTER XXI.

                      TRANSITS AND OCCULTATIONS.


No book professing to deal with eclipses would be complete without a few
words of mention of “transits” and “occultations.” A transit is the
passing of a primary planet across the Sun, or of a secondary planet
(_i.e._ satellite) across its primary, whilst an occultation is the
concealment of a star by the Moon, or of a secondary planet (_i.e._
satellite) by its primary. A little thought given to this definition
will make it clear that a transit is essentially the same in principle
as an eclipse of the Sun by the Moon—one body comes in front of another,
and the former conceals in succession parts of the latter.

Practically the word “transit” in this connection is more especially
applied to passages of the inferior planets, Mercury and Venus, across
the Sun, or of the satellites of Jupiter across the disc of Jupiter,
whilst the word “occultation” more particularly calls to mind the
concealment of a star (apparently a little body) by the Moon (apparently
a big body) or of a satellite of Jupiter (a little body) by Jupiter (a
big body), the star and the satellite in each respective case passing
behind the occulting body and being concealed for a shorter or longer
time. Commonly the occulted body will remain hidden for an hour or two,
more or less. In the case of Jupiter the satellites of that planet may
also, on occasions, be seen to undergo eclipse in the shadow cast by
Jupiter itself. An eclipse of a Jovian satellite is therefore on all
fours in principle the same as an eclipse of the Moon, caused, as we
know, by the Moon passing for a short time into the dark shadow cast by
the Earth. The conditions just laid down in respect of Jupiter and its
satellites also find a counterpart in the case of the satellites of
Saturn, but whilst these phenomena are incessantly occurring and visible
in the case of Jupiter, they are exceedingly rare in the case of Saturn
owing to its greater distance and the difficulty of seeing most of its
satellites because of their small apparent size.

Having regard to the circumstance that transits of Mercury and Venus
only happen at intervals of many years, it is not worth while for the
purposes of this work to devote any great amount of space to them. In
point of fact, whilst the next three transits of Mercury are as remote
as 1907, 1914 and 1924, there will be no transit of Venus at all during
the 20th century; not another indeed until A.D. 2004.

From the standpoint of an amateur astronomer the various phenomena which
attend the movements of the satellites of Jupiter, constitute an endless
variety of interesting scenes, which are the more deserving of attention
in that they can be followed with the aid of a telescope of very
moderate size and capabilities.[169]

[Illustration: FIG. 15-16.—OCCULTATION OF JUPITER, AUG. 7, 1889
(_Immersion_)]

Occultations of planets and stars by the Moon may also be recommended to
the notice of the owners of small telescopes as events which are
constantly happening and which may be readily observed. The Moon being
rapidly in motion it will happen in point of fact that stars are
occulted by it, one may say every day, but of course the Moon’s light
entirely blots out the smaller stars and only those as large as, say,
about the 5th magnitude are as a rule worth trying to see in this
connection. A table of the occultations of such stars, copied from the
_Nautical Almanac_, will be found in such almanacs as _Whitaker’s_ and
the _British_. If such a table is consulted it will be found that never
does a lunation pass without a few stars being noted as undergoing
occultation, and now and then a planet. An occultation of a planet is
obviously still more interesting than that of a star.

[Illustration: FIG. 17-18.—OCCULTATION OF JUPITER, AUG. 7, 1889
(_Emersion_).]

From the epoch of New to Full Moon the Moon moves with its dark edge
foremost from the epoch of Full to New with its illuminated edge
foremost. During therefore the first half of a lunation the objects
occulted disappear at the dark edge and reappear at the illuminated
edge, during the second half of a lunation things are _vice versâ_. The
most interesting time for watching occultations is with a young Moon no
more than, say, from 2 to 6 days old, because under such circumstances
the star occulted is suddenly extinguished at a point in the sky where
there seems nothing to interfere with it.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 169: For details as to these matters, see my _Handbook of
    Astronomy_, 4th ed., vol. i. pp. 186-196.]




                               APPENDIX.

             THE TOTAL ECLIPSE OF THE SUN OF MAY 28, 1900.


This Appendix deals solely with geographical and transport matters as to
which accurate information is not easily obtainable, the European _locus
in quo_ of the Eclipse being in the benighted and somewhat untravelled
countries of Portugal and Spain.

The intending Eclipse excursionist must first make his choice between
(practically) a journey of all sea or of all land. The several sea
routes are one and all very much cheaper than any possible land journey,
and almost as quick in point of time, with the minimum amount of
personal knocking about. But (some persons will say) sea is sea, and so
it is. On the other hand the land journey is exceedingly expensive; and
beyond France the trains are very incommodious as regards hours, speed,
and connections. Moreover, there being more frontiers than one to cross,
there are extra opportunities for Custom-house squabbles, and Spain
especially is famous for this sort of thing.

As the Eclipse shadow will strike Europe in Portugal and quit Europe in
Spain the intending traveller must first decide for himself whether he
will prefer to go to Portugal or Spain. This settled, he will have the
choice of several sea routes and, in particular, of two land routes. But
before considering these further it will be well to state what are the
chief of the various places which are available as observing stations
for mixed travelling parties of ladies and gentlemen who have no desire
to rough it in out-of-the-way parts of the country.

The line of central eclipse passes across the Peninsula diagonally from
N.W. to S.E. It enters Portugal on the coast not far from Oporto in
latitude 40° 50′ N., longitude 8° 38′ W. of Greenwich. It quits Spain on
the coast at Cape Santa Pola, not far from Alicante, in latitude 38° 13′
N., longitude 0° 30′ W. At Ovar in Portugal (pop. 11000), 23m. S. of
Oporto the duration of the total phase will be 1m. 33½s., and the Sun’s
altitude at totality will be 42°. At Talavera de la Reina in Spain (pop.
9700) the duration will be 1m. 27½s., and the altitude 39°; whilst at
Alicante (pop. 40000) the duration will be still less, 1m. 19s., and
the Sun’s altitude only 34°. The three towns of Ovar, Talavera and
Alicante are selected _Nautical Almanac_ Eclipse stations, for which
special calculations have been made.

Hotel accommodation may be had at all the foregoing places, Oporto,
Ovar, Talavera and Alicante, as will be stated later on, but the Hotels
at Ovar and Talavera are not of much account.

Other towns more or less handy for the central line are few in number,
and as a rule deficient in lodging accommodation conforming to the
English standard. Amongst such possible alternative places the
following may be named (in order of position from N.W. to S.E.) as
accessible by railway:—

VIZEU (pop. 7000; hotels, _Mabilia_, _Cadite_), on a branch of the Beira
Alta Railway 31m. from Santa Comba Dao Junction, which itself is 88m.
from Oporto.

MANGUALDE (pop. 3000), on the Beira Alta Railway, 115m. from Oporto, and
49m. from Pampilhosa Junction.

PLASENCIA (pop. 6000; hotel, _F. de Eusebio Sierra_), 6m. N. of the
station of that name on the Lisbon and Madrid Railway.

NAVALMORAL (pop. 3300, buffet), a station on the Lisbon and Madrid
Railway about 8m. W. of the central line of eclipse.

URDA, a small station on the Madrid and Ciudad Real Railway, crossed by
the central line. The nearest accommodation would seem to be at Ciudad
Real (pop. 14000; hotel, _Baltasar Garcia_), 33m. to the S.

ALCAZAR DE SAN JUAN Junction (pop. 8400; good buffet; hotel, _Casa
Briseño_). Alcazar is 92m. S. of Madrid; the central line crosses the
railway about 15m. to the S. of the town.

TOBARRA (pop. 7500), a station on the Chinchilla and Cartagena Railway,
212m. S. of Madrid, and 115m. N. of Cartagena, lies about 6m. S. of the
central line.

NOVELDA (pop. 8000), a station on the Alicante and Madrid Railway, in a
beautiful valley about 20m. N. of Alicante.

In addition to the above places it must not be forgotten that both
Oporto at one end of the zone of totality and Alicante at the other are
within the track of the shadow, but the question of the meteorological
conditions of the atmosphere at these places (on the seaboard as they
virtually are) has to be considered.

A traveller from England to Portugal or Spain by sea has the following
choice of routes:—

1. _Southampton to Oporto_, fortnightly, on Fridays, by the steamers of
the “Royal Mail Steam Packet Co.” Fare, first-class return, about £11.
Time, about 54h. The return tickets are conveniently grouped in various
ways, _e.g._ Southampton to Oporto, and back from Vigo or Lisbon; or
Southampton to Lisbon and back, or back from Vigo (_but not back from
Oporto_). Where the booking is to Vigo, or Lisbon, of course the local
railway fares have to be paid in addition. Lisbon is 209m. S. of Oporto;
Vigo, 110m. N. of Oporto. One objection to making any use of Vigo is the
extra Custom-house formalities which have to be gone through on the
frontier, and Spanish Custom-house officials are specially
objectionable.

2. _Liverpool_ to _Corunna_, _Carril_, _Vigo_ and _Oporto_, fortnightly,
on Thursdays, by the steamers of the “Pacific Steam Navigation Co.”
Fares, to the Spanish ports, first-class single, £6, 10s., return, £9,
15s.; second-class single, £4. To the Portuguese ports, first-class
single, £8, return, £12; second-class single, £5. Time, about 4 to 5
days. This does not mean that the steamers are very slow, but they call
also at La Rochelle, in France.

3. _London_ (Irongate Wharf) to _Oporto_, at intervals of 3 weeks, on
Thursdays, by the steamers of the “General Steam Navigation Co.” Fares,
first-class single, £4 (no return tickets issued; no second-class). The
steamers of this line are inferior to all the others.

4. _London_ (Tilbury) to _Gibraltar_, weekly, on Thursdays, by the
“P. & O.” steamers. Fares, first-class single, £10, return, £16. Time, 4
to 5 days.

5. _London_ (Tilbury) and _Plymouth_ to _Gibraltar_, fortnightly, on
Fridays, by the steamers of the “Orient Co.” Fares and time the same as
the “P. & O.”

Travellers journeying to Oporto from England will probably not attempt
to do any more local sight-seeing than what can be readily accomplished
by simple railway trips in Portugal to or from Lisbon; but travellers
landing at Gibraltar will have it within their power to visit some of
the important towns of Southern Spain, such as Granada, Seville,
Cordova, Toledo, Cadiz, Malaga, &c.

An Eclipse excursionist who finds himself at Gibraltar, and who wishes
to avoid as much as possible land travelling in Spain by going on to
Alicante and stationing himself in that neighbourhood, must take
shipping locally at Gibraltar. There are Spanish steamer services from
Gibraltar, and Malaga, to Alicante.

An overland traveller to Spain (it is presumed that none such will go as
far as Portugal) has the choice of two routes to eclipse stations in
Spain, both starting from Paris:—(1) _viâ_ Bordeaux, Hendaye, Vittoria,
Burgos and Medina del Campo, to Madrid, and thence either W. to Talavera
(84m. from Madrid), or S. towards Alcazar de San Juan (92m. from
Madrid); (2) _viâ_ Lyons, Perpignan, Barcelona and Valencia to Alicante.
The character of the train service on the second of these routes is
almost prohibitive, so that it is almost a question of _viâ_ Madrid or
not at all.

The foregoing paragraphs will furnish the reader with an outline of the
whole problem of how to reach from England a suitable eclipse station in
the Peninsula. This outline will pave the way for further details as to
land journeys, which will be exhibited somewhat in the order of relative
complexity and expense, beginning with the simplest.


                            VIGO TO OPORTO.

Chief stations and distances from Vigo:—Redondela (8m.), Guillarey
Junct. (24m.), Tuy (26m.), Vianna (57m.), Famalicao Junct. (88m.),
Oporto (108m.).

VIGO (pop. 17000; hotel, _Continental_) is an important commercial
centre with fine scenery all round. REDONDELA is one of the prettiest
towns in Spain, especially as viewed from the railway viaducts. At
GUILLAREY carriages may have to be changed for TUY, the last station in
Spain and a Custom-house. There is a fine cathedral at Tuy. The boundary
is formed by the river Minho, spanned by a magnificent bridge 400 yards
long, railway above and carriage road underneath. Crossing it the train
enters the Portuguese town of VALENÇA, where there is a strong fortress
and a custom-house. VIANNA (pop. 7000; hotel, _Central_). The river Lima
is here spanned by a double bridge (rail and road) 700 ft. long. From
FAMALICAO there is a loop line to Oporto running round the coast and
15m. longer than the main line. ERMEZINDE is the junction with the
Spanish line to Barca d’Alva, Salamanca and France.


                      OPORTO TO OVAR AND LISBON.

From Oporto to Lisbon by the direct line it is 211m. Fares—first,
single, £1, 11s.; second, single, £1, 3s. But forwards from Pampilhosa
(66m.) there is a loop line to Lisbon, running along the coast, and 25m.
longer than the direct line. If it is proposed to visit some of the
sights which will be mentioned presently, the coast line must be taken.

Chief stations between Oporto and Lisbon by the coast line:—Ovar (23m.),
Pampilhosa Junct. (66m.), Figueira da Foz (92m.), Leiria (132m.), Torres
Vedras (192m.), Lisbon, Rocio station, (236m.).

OPORTO (pop. 120000; hotels, _Grande Hotel do Porto_, _Hotel de Paris_)
is a busy commercial city with much English colouring; _e.g._ church,
hospital, doctor, club, and full modern facilities for locomotion by
tramways, cabs and excursion carriages. The chief sights are:—(1)
Cathedral, (2) Bishop’s Palace, (3) Church of St. Francisco, (4) Palacio
da Bolsa, (5) Museu Portuense, (6) Museu Industrial, (7) Crystal Palace
and Gardens, (8) Bridge of Don Luiz I., and (9) Convent immortalised by
Wellington in 1809 when he made his celebrated “Passage of the Douro.”
The port for Oporto where the steamers from England load and discharge
is Leixões, about 4m. to the W., with a service of trains and trams into
the city.

OVAR.—This town being the nearest eclipse centre to England may be
expected to draw many travellers in 1900. Being only 22m. or 1½ hours
from Oporto, a day trip may be made thither from Oporto, and this will
suit the convenience of those who prefer for lodgings a large city to a
small provincial town. A train from Oporto at 7 a.m. returning at 7.45
p.m. will suffice for the requirements of all who will go armed only
with small instruments.

PAMPILHOSA JUNCTION (Good Hotel).—Within 10m. to the N.-E. of this
station is the first of the special sights which can be seen in
connection with the Oporto-Lisbon railway. Take the train from
Pampilhosa to Luzo (6m.), omnibus thence (½ hour) to Busaco (Good
Hotel), and see the battlefield, the site of one of Wellington’s least
successful victories. The panoramic views in all directions are superb.
The famous convent is now a Government School of Forestry. After seeing
Busaco progress may be made to FIGUEIRA DA FOZ (38m. from Luzo—Good
Hotel), where the tourist may pass the night, unless he prefers to stay
at Pampilhosa. Figueira is a seaside bathing-place of repute on a branch
line.

LEIRIA (pop. 3000, _Novo Hotel_).—Stay here two nights in order to have
the whole of the intervening day available for a circular tour by road
to the Dominican Monastery at Batalha (7m.), and to the Cistercian
Monastery at Alcobaça (13m. from Batalha, and also 13m. from Leiria).
The Batalha Monastery (built 1388-1515) is by common consent the finest
piece of architecture in Portugal. The Alcobaça Monastery, the largest
in the world, is of earlier date (1148-1222). The ch., 360 ft. long, is
the most interesting example of early Christian art in Portugal, whilst
the cloisters are reputed to be amongst the finest in Europe.
Refreshments must be taken by the traveller, for none can be procured
during the drive. Vallado is really the nearest station to Alcobaça
(3m.), but there is no sleeping accommodation there.

LISBON (pop. 250000; hotels—_Braganza_, _Avenida_, and some adjoining
the railway station) owing to its great length from E. to W., and narrow
breadth from N. to S., is a less easy city to find one’s way in than
many other cities. This difficulty is aggravated by the want of leading
thoroughfares and an efficient system of street naming and numbering.
The sights are the usual ones of every large Continental city, such as
churches, museums, and picture galleries; _e.g._ the Church of San
Roque, the Church of San Vincente with its remarkable Royal Mortuary
Chapel, the church and convent at Belem, and the gardens of the Escola
Polytechnica. But a day should certainly be set apart for a trip to
Cintra (17m. by rail, trains about every hour). The town (pop. 5000,
hotel—_Lawrence’s_) is 1800 ft. above the sea. See the Royal or Moorish
Palace in the town, the beautiful Pena Palace and grounds, and the
gardens of Sir F. Cook at _Villa Montserrate_ (3m). These last are open
daily to visitors who write their names at the entrance lodge. About 15
miles from Cintra is Mafra, with a palace, convent, and church of
wonderful magnificence. An Eclipse excursionist planning a time-table
for sight-seeing between Oporto and Lisbon inclusive, and with the
intention of returning to England from Lisbon, must remember that the
Royal Mail Company’s boats only sail fortnightly (on Tuesdays or
Wednesdays) from Lisbon. The boats anchor in the river, and are reached
by a steam tender.


                           OPORTO TO PARIS.

This route for getting from or to possible eclipse stations in Northern
Spain or Portugal is set out on the supposition that a certain number of
Eclipse excursionists may wish to combine the Paris Exhibition with the
eclipse. There is an International Express from Oporto (and Lisbon)
every Tuesday and Friday, which does the journey to Paris in 40 hours,
but no one travelling for pleasure would use this train, especially as
much of the best scenery is traversed by night.

The journey should therefore be performed in sections, which may be made
up as follows:—

                                         Miles.
Oporto to Salamanca _viâ_ Pampilhosa        269
Salamanca to Burgos                         150
Burgos to Biarritz                          186
Biarritz to Paris                           493

Use should be made as far as possible of the International Express.
Where this is not done, and ordinary trains have to be taken, the delays
are interminable and the combinations most exasperating to an
Englishman. The hotel accommodation in all the smaller towns of Spain is
so universally bad that it is not easy to suggest what otherwise would
seem obvious, namely, how best to subdivide, at any rate, the first
three of the above sections.

The International Express has a connection with Lisbon, the main train
being made up or divided as the case may be at Pampilhosa Junction.


                    LISBON TO TALAVERA AND MADRID.

Observers who think they will be able to do better as regards a clear
sky inland in Spain than near either the coast of Portugal or that of
Spain will still find in many cases that Lisbon is their most convenient
port for landing.

The chief stations on this route are:—Entroncamento Junction (67m.),
Marvão (149m.), Valencia de Alcantara (159m.), *Plasencia (256m.),
*Navalmoral (287m.), *Talavera de la Reina (328m.), Madrid, Delicias
Stat. (412m.). The places marked (*) are all within the shadow track of
the eclipse.

ENTRONCAMENTO (Good Buffet) is the junction station for the lines N. to
Oporto and S.-E. to Badajos and most trains wait here: 8m. beyond, the
Tagus is crossed by a fine bridge commanding good views.

MARVÃO (Custom-house) is the last station in Portugal but the actual
frontier is 6m. further on. VALENCIA DE ALCANTARA (Custom-house) is the
first station in Spain. During the next 50m. the railway passes through
much wild mountain scenery.

PLASENCIA, NAVALMORAL, and TALAVERA as eclipse stations have been
mentioned on a previous page. Many celebrated struggles during the
Peninsular War took place in this part of Spain, notably at Talavera in
1809 and at Almaraz in 1812.

MADRID (pop. 470000; _Hotel de Paris_, _Hotel de la Paix_).


GIBRALTAR TO MADRID (WITH EXCURSIONS, ON THE WAY, TO GRANADA AND
SEVILLE).

From Algeçiras (opposite Gibraltar) there runs every Wednesday an
International Express train to Madrid and Paris. The eclipse central
line crosses this route about 15m. S. of Alcazar de San Juan Junction
(pop. 8400; Good Buffet, Hotel, _Casa Briseño_) which is 368m. N. of
Algeçiras and 93m. S. of Madrid.

The chief stations between Algeçiras and Madrid are:—Bobadilla Junct.
(110m.), Cordova (185m.), Alcazar de San Juan (369m.), Aranjuez (430m.),
and Madrid (461m.).

Bobadilla is a double junction. A line runs thence E. to Granada
(75m.), and W. to Seville (104m.). A traveller visiting Granada must
return to Bobadilla to get to Seville, but from Seville he can rejoin
the main line at Cordova 75m. N. of Bobadilla, and avoid Bobadilla. From
Seville to Cordova is 81m.

Algeçiras is reached from Gibraltar by a local steamer. About one hour
is allowed to make the connection with the train. Eclipse travellers
going to this part of Spain who wish to take advantage of their
proximity to Granada and Seville will find the following time-table
usefully suggestive:—

May 16, W.    Gibraltar to Granada, 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
 "  17, T.    At Granada.
 "  18, F.    At Granada.
 "  19, S.    Granada to Seville, 7 a.m. to 6 p.m.
 "  20, Sun.  At Seville.
 "  21, M.    At Seville.
 "  22, Tu.   Seville to Cordova, 11 a.m. to 3 p.m.
 "  23, W.    At Cordova.
 "  24, T.    Cordova to Alcazar, 2 a.m. to 3 p.m.
 "  25, F.    At Alcazar.
 "  26, S.    At Alcazar.
 "  27, Sun.  At Alcazar.
 "  28, M.    Eclipse day.

Corresponding to the above International train there is an express from
Paris on Mondays reaching Algeçiras on Wednesdays. This, of course,
might suit the convenience of Eclipse travellers proposing to go to
Spain _viâ_ France, and perhaps return _viâ_ Gibraltar. The time
occupied by the International train between Paris and Algeçiras and
_vice versâ_ is about 49 hours.


                          LONDON TO ALICANTE.

The central line of the eclipse quits Spain at Cape Santa Pola about
10m. S. of Alicante (pop. 40000): it crosses the line of the Alicante
and Madrid railway at Novelda (pop. 8000) a station about 20m. inland
from Alicante.

Alicante may be reached from England as follows:—(1) All sea, _viâ_
Gibraltar and Malaga; (2) all land, _viâ_ Paris, Biarritz and Madrid
(1077m.), or Paris, Lyons and Perpignan (1126m.); or (3) part land and
part sea, _viâ_ Paris and Marseilles, and thence by steamer to Barcelona
and Valencia.

As regards the two land routes there is not very much to choose except
that the Biarritz-Madrid route is somewhat shorter and much quicker than
the Perpignan-Barcelona route. As regards the two sea routes both are
probably bad from the standpoint of comfort, the steamers in which the
voyage would have to be completed being Spanish coasting vessels, but it
is difficult to obtain particulars of them in England.

The following are some of the chief places between Paris and Alicante on
the Perpignan route:—Dijon (195m.), Lyons (318m.), Avignon (461m.),
Nîmes (490m.), Perpignan (623m.), Spanish frontier at Port Bou (650m.),
Barcelona (758m.), Tarragona (825m.), Valencia (997m.), Alicante
(1126m.). The journey from Paris to Barcelona is accomplished in 23h. by
the International Express: the remaining 368 miles take 27 hours owing
to the bad connections of the trains.

Madrid is 285m. from Alicante, the journey occupying about 29h.


                 USEFUL BOOKS FOR PORTUGAL AND SPAIN.

As the result of much inquiry and research, the following may be
suggested:—


                             GUIDE-BOOKS.

_Handbook for Spain_, 2 vols. 20_s._ (J. Murray.)

_Handbook to Spain and Portugal_, Dr. Charnock. 7_s._ 6_d._ (W. J.
Adams.)

_Guide to Spain and Portugal_, O’Shea and Lomas. 15_s._ (A. & C. Black.)

_Handbook for Portugal._ 12_s._ (J. Murray.)


                             DICTIONARIES.

JÄSCHKE, R. _English-Spanish Conversation Dictionary._ 3_s._ 6_d._
(Nutt.)

CASTRO DE LA FAYETTE. _Novo Diccionario Inglez-Portugueze._ 2 vols.
6_s._


                      GRAMMARS AND PHRASE BOOKS.

D’ORSEY, Rev. A. J. D. _Colloquial Portuguese._ 3_s._ 6_d._ (Kegan
Paul.)

WALL, C. H. _Practical Portuguese Grammar._ 7_s._ (Nutt.)

THIMM, C. A. _Spanish Self-taught._ 1_s._ 6_d._ (Marlborough.)

_Spanish Conversation Book._ 1_s._ (Walter Scott.)

HUGO. _Spanish Simplified._ 2 Parts and Key. 1_s._ 6_d._ (1A Paternoster
Row.)


                               VARIOUS.

CHAMBERS, G. F. _The Tourist’s Pocket-Book._ [Vocabulary of 16
Languages]. 1_s._ (Philip.)

THIMM, C. A. _Spanish Washing Lists for both Sexes._ 6_d._
(Marlborough.)


[Illustration: DIAGRAM OF CONSPICUOUS STARS AND PLANETS LIKELY TO BE
VISIBLE DURING THE TOTAL ECLIPSE OF THE SUN, MAY 28, 1900.]




                                INDEX.


⁂ The Eclipses referred to in the Chapters on History (VIII.-XIII.) are
not, as regards dates, dealt with in this Index.

A.

Aberdour, Lord, 159.
Agathocles, The Eclipse of, 120.
Ahaz, Dial of, 90, 96, 101.
Airy, Sir G. B., 48, 74, 83, 84, 89, 110, 111, 113, 115, 123, 124, 144,
  164, 167.
_Almanac, British_, 219.
_Almanac, Nautical_, 26, 35, 234, 238.
Ammianus Marcellinus, 133.
_Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_, 136, 137, 138, 142, 143, 146, 148, 205, 206,
  207, 208, 209.
_Annales Fuldenses_, 143, 207.
Annular Eclipses of the Sun, 16.
Apollonius of Tyana, 130.
Arabian Records, 132, 138.
Arago, 125, 164.
Archilochus, 108.
Aristophanes, 199.
Ascending Node, 18.
Asser, 144.


B.

Baily, F., 57, 112, 122, 164.
“Baily’s Beads,” 57, 64, 164.
Barker, Sir R., 102.
Bede, 205.
Beer, 217.
Bible, Eclipses mentioned in, 86.
Biot, E., 80.
“Black” Eclipses of the Moon, 189.
Blackness of the Moon during Solar Eclipses, 43.
Blake, 48.
Boillot, 135.
Bosanquet, J. W., 91, 95, 101.


C.

Calvisius, 133, 137, 146, 221.
Carlini, 164.
Carrington, R. C., 60.
Cassini, 158.
Caussin, 139.
Cedrenus, 208.
Celoria, Prof., 150.
Chinese Eclipses of the Sun, 75.
—— of the Moon, 197.
Chromosphere, 60.
_Chronicon Scotorum_, 143.
Churton, Archdeacon, 210.
Cicero, 108, 109, 118.
Classical History, Eclipses mentioned in, 107.
Clavius, 64, 152.
Columbus, 211.
Confucius, 81.
Conjunction of the Moon, 31.
Copper colour of Moon in Lunar Eclipses, 192.
Corona, 56, 62, 105, 130, 144, 157, 159, 161, 168, 169.
Coronium, 69.
Crabtree, W., 215.
Crucifixion, The darkness at, 129.


D.

Delambre, 81.
De La Rue, W., 168.
De Louville, 158.
Descending Node, 18.
Dial of Ahaz, 90, 96, 101.
Digit explained, 28.
Diodorus Siculus, 120.
Diogenes Laërtius, 94.
Dion Cassius, 128, 130.
Draconic Month, 20.
Dreyer, J. L. E., 221.
Du Sèjour, 37, 39.


E.

Earthquakes and Eclipses, 75.
Earth-shine, 61.
Eclipsareon, Ferguson’s, 222.
Eclipse, Derivation of the word, 11.
——, number of in a year, 13.
—— of the Moon, 11.
—— of the Sun, 11.
——, Theory of, 15.
Eclipse of the Sun of May 28, 1900, 9, 40, 66, 71, 239.
Ennius, 118.


F.

Ferguson, J., 215, 221.
Ferrer, Don J., 163.
Flamsteed, J., 155, 215.
Florence of Worcester, 143.
Forster, 192.
Freeman, Prof. E. A., 146.
Full Moon, 13.


G.

Gassendi, P., 215, 221.
Gaubil, 80.
Gemma Frisius, 152.
Gilliss, Lieut. J. M., 168.
Ginzel, 75, 131.
Glaber, 145, 208.
Glycas, 92.
Grant, R., 131.
Graydon, 174.
Gregorius Turonensis, 135.


H.

Hagen, 163.
Halley, E., 148, 157.
Hansen’s Lunar Tables, 89, 118, 119, 124.
Helium, 69.
Helps, Sir A., 211.
Herodotus, 109, 114, 116.
Herschel, Sir J., 217.
Herschel, Sir W., 161, 162.
Hevelius, 215.
Hezekiah, King of Judah, 90.
Hinckes, Dr., 89.
Hind, J. R., 38, 80, 89, 115, 116, 125, 138, 142, 143, 147, 148, 151,
  153, 154, 167, 203, 204.
Hitzig, 87.
Homer’s _Iliad_ quoted, 126.
Homer’s _Odyssey_ quoted, 94, 126.
Huggins, Sir W., 131.
Humboldt, A. Von, 133, 142, 217.
Hunter, W., 102.


I.

Ideler, 81.


J.

Janssen, 169.
Jesuit Missionaries in China, 81, 95.
Johnson, Rev. S. J., 38, 80, 128, 131, 133, 135, 137, 138, 142, 144, 145,
  150, 202, 210, 216, 222.
Jones, Capt. F., 113.
Josephus, 202.
Justin, 121.


K.

Kepler, 64, 152, 153, 213, 214, 220.
Kerigan, F., 227.
Kirchoff, 69.


L.

Lalande, J. De, 224.
Lander, R. and J., 228.
Langley, Prof., 171.
Lardner, D., His _Hand-book of Astronomy_ cited, 12.
Lassell, W., 167.
Layard, Sir A. H., 113.
Leon of Corfu, 144.
Le Verrier’s Solar Tables, 89.
Lewis, Sir G. C., 110.
Liais, E., 44.
Limits, Lunar Ecliptic, 190.
Lingard, Dr., 150.
Livy, 125, 202.
Lockyer, Sir N., 178.
Lynn, W. T., 115, 131.


M.

Macartney, Lord, his Embassy to China, 224.
Maclaurin, 151, 153, 159.
Mädler, 217.
Magnitude of an Eclipse, 29.
Main, Rev. R., 88.
Maraldi, 158.
Matthew Paris, 210.
Maunder, E. W., 104, 106.
Meteorological effects of a solar eclipse, 54, 167.
Millosevich, 109.
Milton, J., 231.
Moon, Eclipses of, 186.


N.

_Nautical Almanac_, 26, 35, 234, 238.
Newcomb, S., 119, 127, 139, 144, 171.
Newcomb, S., His _Astronomy_ cited, 26.
New Moon, 13.
Newton, Sir I., 198.
Nicias, 199.
Nineveh Tablets, 89.
Nodes, 18, 19, 30.


O.

Occultations, 10, 12, 235, 237.
Ockley, S., 138.
Oltmanns, 112.
Oppolzer, T. Von, His _Canon_ cited, 35, 109, 218.
Opposition of the Moon, 31.
Orchard, Dr., 231.


P.

Partial Eclipses of the Sun, 17.
Pekin, Observatory at, 95.
Penumbra in Lunar Eclipses, 188.
Pepys, S., His _Diary_ cited, 155.
Perry, S. J., 177, 193.
Philostorgius, 134.
Philostratus, 130.
Pickering, E. H., 184.
Pingré, 219.
Planets, Primary, 12.
——, Secondary, 12.
——, Visibility of during Eclipses, 61.
Pliny, 126, 200, 204, 213.
Plutarch, _Lives_, 108, 115, 117, 120, 126, 131, 199, 200, 201.
Polybius, 200.
Pope, A., 94, 233.
Powell, Sir G. B., 178.
Prominences, 59.
Pusey, Dr. E. B., 87, 88.


R.

Rawlinson, Sir H. C., 88, 111.
Red Flames, 59, 156, 159, 168.
Ricciolus, J. B., 220, 222.
Roger of Wendover, 149, 210.
Roger de Hoveden, 205.
Rothmann, R. W., 77.
Rümker, 48.
Russell, S. M., 78, 79, 198, 225.


S.

Santini, 164.
“Saros,” The, 14, 18, 112, 157.
Schnurrer, 142.
Schuster, 172.
Season of Eclipses, 29.
Seneca, 126.
Shadow Bands, 46.
Shadow of Moon on Earth, 36, 41, 49, 73.
Shakespeare, W., 229.
Smith, J. D., 48.
Smyth, Admiral W. H., 217.
Short, J., 159.
Suetonius, 126.
Snooke, W. D., 223.
Spain, Eclipse of 1900 visible in, 10.
Spots on the Sun, 67, 69.
Stannyan, Capt., 60, 156.
Staunton, Sir G., 224.
Stockwell, J. N., 131, 202, 223.
Stone, E. J., 193.
“Stiklastad,” “Eclipse of,” 144.
Struve, O., 164.
Struyck, N., 221.
Stukeley, Dr. W., 157, 160.


T.

Tacitus, 203.
Telegraph,  Electric, and Eclipses, 179.
“Thales,” “Eclipse of,” 103, 109, 123.
Thirlwall, Bishop, 116.
Thucydides, 117, 118.
Tibullus, 126.
Todd, Mrs. D. T., her _Total Eclipses_ cited, 25, 27, 50, 56, 65, 71,
  136, 146, 173, 183, 223, 231.
Totality, Approach of, 49.
——, Darkness of, 53.
Transits, 10, 12, 235.
Trithenius, 204.
Trouvelot, 106.
Tycho Brahe, 137, 143, 150, 152, 213, 214, 220.


U.

Ulloa, Don A., 64, 161, 179.
Usher, Archbishop, 87.


V.

Valz, 164.


W.

Wallis, Dr., 155.
Wargentin, 216.
Wesley, W. H., 66.
William of Malmesbury, 145, 147.
Williams, J., 81, 82, 83, 85, 86.
Wolcott, Miss K. E., 106.
Wyberd, Dr., 154.


X.

Xenophon, 112, 113, 119.


Y.

Young, Prof., 178.


Z.

Zech, 119.



[Transriber’s Note: The table below lists all corrections applied to the
original text.

p. 014: [removed extra hyphen] more than 18-years -> 18 years
p. 023: Phillipines -> Philippines
p. 027: occuring at regular intervals -> occurring
p. 048: Rumker mentions that -> Rümer
p. 059: every sufficiently skilled obersver -> observer
p. 070: [added closing bracket] (SUN-SPOT MINIMUM.)
p. 154: [removed comma] Greenock and Elgin, were near
p. 217: in the Carribean Sea -> Caribbean
p. 227: A certain Mr F. Kerigan -> Mr. F. Kerigan
p. 230: [removed comma] As, stars with trains of fire
p. 241: Casa Brisẽno -> Briseño
p. 244: Vienna (57m.) -> Vianna
p. 249: [normalized] Plasentia (256m.) -> Plasencia
p. 250: Casa Brisẽno -> Briseño ]
